When I use the word, this word properly is immediate misunderstanding in the United States
because the way that aspect is presented.
If I say the word yoga is a great misunderstanding, if I use the word tantra, there is even more
misunderstanding about it.
So all aspects of life can be referred to either as tantra or as look.
They are not really different.
It is just approaching it in a certain way, that's all.
In fact, tantra also is referred to as yoga.
Yoga means union, it includes everything.
Tantra means a technique, a method.
So when yoga involves itself and you method, it is referred to as tantras.
Among these tantras, there are 64 basic tantras.
These 64 tantras can be classified according to the people who pursue the tantra.
Generally we can classify people into three dimensions, either known as thammasic, logistic
and sattva.
Now we are referring to four as zero pranic, positive pranic, negative pranic.
This is the same classification.
There are three dimensions or three qualities, it is called as thammasic, logistic and sattva.
Thammas means it is a lower sacrifice where the most dominant aspects of life will be
food, sleep, anger, agitation, anxiety.
All these things come with thammas.
Tha just means measure, ambition, courage, these things come in thasas.
Sattva means peacefulness, wisdom, blissfulness, this comes in sattva.
These are the three qualities, the fundamental, but the whole existence can be classified
as three.
So generally people are referred to as three categories, either thammas, thasas or that.
So the ancient sages who formed the methods, who sort of assimilated the methods, fully
understood that people are different levels as they are and they wanted to create a possibility
for every kind of human being, whoever he may be.
Whoever kind of state he is in, he will be able to make his spiritual method.
And the way they categorize the methods of spirituality shows how compassion and fairness
take in.
Out of the 64, with yes means.
With yes means a learning are a discipline.
Out of 64 disciplines, 59 disciplines are rama, rama means left handed, are to put it more
into your understanding.
It is wrong handed, that's what it means.
In India, right hand is the right hand.
Okay.
In India we have right hand is not just right in its placement, it is the right hand.
Left is the wrong hand.
This started to work with a certain deep understanding, but slowly, because we have a way of being
introduced against anybody and everybody, against anything and everything.
In our own body, we identified some parts as superior, some parts as inferior.
Right hand is superior, left hand is inferior.
So rama means wrong handed, yes, left handed disciplines.
So 59 out of the 64 are left handed, they are dedicated to thomasic people, the lowest
category, the dullest, the most negative kind of possibilities will have.
59 methods were devised only for them, because they saw that they need more resistance.
So these 59 ways involve so many processes, every aspect of life is included in this,
they have no sense of what is right and wrong, simply whatever is needed is done.
Only the last five are dedicated to thomasic and satriyubhu.
In fact, for satriyubhu, only one method is there.
For those who are satriyubhu, they don't have much help.
So this, if you look at this the way these methods have been involved, you will see these
people had absolutely no sense of right and wrong from them.
Their people were just looking for a way to transcend the limitations of life and so on.
So the yogic processes are designed only to transcend non-different aspects of your life.
We want to hit the root of the problem, the only problem that you have is because of your
identification of the limited part.
All these other things have come up.
We experience yourself within this little body, which causes so much struggle and turmoil
and limits you.
And once you have come as a human being, you don't like to be limited.
Human kind of limitation is put upon you, a struggle arises in you.
This is just that a lot of people take a whole lifetime to realize this.
Some people realize it quickly that I can't live within these limitations.
The more and more entertainment we are creating in the world, just to avoid that we are limited,
just to face the fact, just to avoid facing the fact that we are limited to human beings.
With all this entertainment, all the television is going on 108 channels every time and you
don't know what's happening with yourself.
Sitting there on your couch, eating fries, you can go up the mountain, you can fly in
the sky, you can lough, you can find all the things that you never dare to do.
You can do.
Yes?
Now, this gives you a false sense of security and expansion, which is not true.
It gives you an expanded vision, which is not the reality, but it keeps you satisfied for
quite some time.
It will take, generally I think, people will take about 7 to 8 years to get rid of the
television from their life.
7 to 8 years, they continuously watch them somehow, nothing seems to make sense to them.
So that also, they know, so they will watch it internally.
See if you think something is worthwhile, what I would tell you is, do it with all passion.
You will see it's not getting you anywhere.
As somebody came and confessed to a rabbi, a rabbi I am singing, the rabbi said, seems
strongly, this is a wise man, he knows the way of life.
If you sing strongly, you will know it's not getting you anywhere.
If you try to avoid it, any of you cannot avoid it totally, off and on, off and on, you do
within between confessions.
If you help you to keep on going with the same thing for the rest of your life, nothing
will change in your life.
So if something is attracting you too much, you think it's very valuable to you.
Do it with all passion and you will see it doesn't get you anywhere.
Once you know it's very limited, you don't want to have anything to do with it.
It will naturally come to you because your nature is subtle, it will not settle for that
which is limited.
You cannot be with it for too long, anything that's limited.
If you have seen many aspects of your life, one day in the world you have to a few years,
you just wonder why was I so stupid to be involved with this.
Yes, so many aspects of your life.
This is a big difference that you see in the understanding of life between East and West
is.
West is always talked about release.
Everything you must release it, your psychological situations, you must find release either in
somebody or something.
But the Easter way of life is always, don't release whether it's you England or the hatred
or you will last whatever, keep it inside, cook yourself.
If you don't allow it any release, it will shut up.
This is work.
Don't allow it to live in any way.
Plan the hour of the house.
You plug all the holes, it will only go out.
So this is the way of done through.
This is where these philosophies are taught you dimensional to other ways, what they are
saying is, whatever you may do, whether you get energy or lustful or hatred.
It's tremendous energy, isn't it?
Anger is great energy, isn't it?
hatred is great energy, lust is great energy.
All you have to learn is not to kill the energy, not to rule that release the energy.
Just to transform the energy a little bit.
The man who is even incapable of anger, definitely he is being capable of love also.
Definitely he is incapable of any great compassion.
If energy is bursting in the form of anger, lust or hatred, don't try to kill that energy.
All you have to do is transform it, redirect it to the right direction.
Because who you are in is energy, isn't it?
What you call as life is energy.
Whatever that you are referring to as that divine is also energy.
All you have to do is just find it the right kind of pathway.
It is going in the wrong roads.
You are entering through the world, you know, no entering roads.
You are not in the state, you breathe somewhere.
You have a community of energy where it can be so threatening that you threaten your life.
You become so powerful within your death, you threaten your very life.
Unless energy is that powerful, it will not get anywhere, it will not carry you far enough.
I am talking about this because so many of you have gone through these phases and when
it gets too much you are looking for releases.
Many times situations have come up with a new, that you can't bear it anymore.
Then you go and find a release, you want to be the book, you want to switch on the television
or you want to distract yourself, you want to break the practice for a few days for some
reason.
You do this things because it is a release, you are mining a release for yourself, it
feels good.
But if you go on releasing like this, you will never have the necessary energy to burst into
a different dimension.
You are not going to walk into the next dimension, you have to burst into the next dimension.
If you want to burst, first thing you must block the bursting point.
When you block sufficiently we will put you.
So the practices that you are doing and the methods that we have used is mainly to increase
energy levels in such a way that gradually it finds it great.
If you allow it to find it very naturally, it may take a long time and because you will
not know where you are finding releases for it, you will never know whether it is going
somewhere or not going somewhere.
So there is always a guidance to lead it on.
So your business is just to raise your energy.
There it goes, you don't worry.
Once you have a good in your life, he takes care as to where it should go.
But it is your business to pump it up.
If you don't take up enough energy, then nothing can be done about it.
