When you look at your life, the way you live it, many times you do notice that you are ruled by compulsive emotions.
Today you really want to be peaceful.
Today it happens to be your wife's birthday or husband's something.
You really want to make sure nothing goes wrong.
That's the day just the anger rules you.
This comes out for no reason.
It's happened once, one morning early in the morning.
Shankar and Pillai was walking in the neighborhood on the street, loudly cursing.
Let devil take over your life.
Let snakes infest his belly.
Let the worms come out of your mouth.
Like this he went about cursing.
One of his neighbors saw this man cursing and going.
He stopped him and asked, who are you cursing?
Who are you cursing early in the morning like this?
You see, it doesn't matter whom somebody will come by.
You know that later somebody is bound to come by, so I'm cursing right now.
It is not about anybody.
It is not about anything.
It is a compulsive emotion which is coming out.
Usually whoever is around you becomes the victim.
But actually it doesn't need anybody.
You can get angry with trees.
So these things people try to control for their whole lifetimes and nothing changes.
The mechanics of the mind, the way the mind functions is just the way the paramics of tendencies because mind is just an accumulation.
What kind of accumulation you have, that's how it functions.
If one has to go beyond the limitations or beyond the compulsiveness that a certain type of accumulation creates within us.
Whether one has to raise into a different level of awareness, consciousness with which he can become free or another way he has to transform his energies.
Raising to higher levels of consciousness, generally is very deceptive.
Everybody believes they're very high consciousness.
If you put them to death and they'll fail miserably because the nature of the mind is such, it can deceive you till the end.
This is not a simple instrument.
This is a very, very complex instrument.
You may think you know it, but you will see after twenty-five years you realize that you have been tricking yourself all the way because it's a very, very complex instrument.
Most people are using just a miniscule of their mind so they think it is simple.
Otherwise it's a very complex instrument.
So raising the levels of consciousness is not out of question but still it's very tricky and can be very deceptive.
So believe they have changed many, many times.
Simply because their situations have become little more conducive, they have changed.
If situations become extreme, again they're back to the same place.
Yes, have you noticed this again and again?
Everybody is working in a certain situation and they don't like it and they're constantly angry and disturbed.
They went to a new work situation and they'd say, oh now I'm fine.
Everything is okay with me.
It is not so.
Everything is not okay with you.
Right now the weather is good so you seem to be okay.
Once again the weather turns bad which invariably it will, today or tomorrow.
Again you will go through the same thing.
When you talk about consciousness, you're looking at life in such a way that you are not subject to the processes of life, that the external situations don't decide who you are, that's what it means to become conscious.
That is also a possibility but it can be a great deception game most of the time.
Transforming your energies is a more certain and solid way because here you can't fool yourself.
Here you can't imagine things.
You may imagine I'm in heaven but nothing most here unless you do the right thing with it.
You may imagine that you are very close to God but nothing most here unless something genuinely happens.
So transforming your energies is a more sure path, a more certain path you are walking on solid ground.
And all you need is a certain dedication and involvement in a certain practice.
If one works sufficiently upon his energies, the right sense of understanding and guidance if it is done very easily one can get enlightened on the level of his energy.
His energy will be enlightened.
His consciousness might not have gone beyond but his energies will be enlightened.
We have any number of people like that around us.
In the last fifteen, twenty years we have created many, many people whose energies are enlightened but their consciousness has not risen.
That's a tricky game so we don't work on that, we just leave it.
We're working on it in a certain way but we don't try to raise people's consciousness in a big way because it can be very, very tricky.
It can take you on the wrong path for a whole lifetime and at the end of your life you realize you've been fooling yourself.
We allow the mind to mature slowly, it's okay.
You can still do stupid things but because your energy has reached a certain peak, these stupid things don't really affect your life, they don't rule your life anymore.
It's a very beautiful Zen story.
You might have heard of this master, he was very popular.
His name was Eno.
When Eno came to the monastery, the master looked at him and declared to everybody else
Eno is enlightened.
Then the next day he put Eno in the kitchen to work for next twelve years in the kitchen.
He declared to everybody his enlightenment but then he put similar to the kitchen work for twelve years, an enlightenment being because only his energy is enlightened, his consciousness has not risen.
So in many ways we have hundreds of people today around us who are energy wise enlightened but their consciousness has not risen and we are not in a hurry for that, that will happen slowly to mature off.
People do a certain process.
This is something we have been doing with the inflows groups of people for a long time.
Shiva also has spoken about it.
Shiva says, when the spinal threat is touched, a light begins to glow in and around you.
If you place the whole attention on the Shushum Nanadi and if it is properly touched, then it becomes a lion and it glows.
Once it glows slowly the energy will mature within a very short period of time and energy will become enlightened.
It glows.
You have a glow of an enlightened being but you don't have the consciousness of an enlightened being.
If you stand, if you simply sit quietly, you are a powerful being.
You open your mouth, you are a fool, that's how you will be.
But it's good to be this way because this is easy to achieve.
This is easy to achieve.
All you need is dedication, especially when I am around, this is very easy to do.
If you just touch the spinal cord, it can just glow.
