It has always been hard for me to explain to people about what Viji is.
When I say Viji, I am not referring to her, either as my wife or as a woman.
As a being, she has always been truly wonderful in my experience.
But as many of you know, she is a person of very intense emotions.
In her childlikeness, she never knew what should be expressed or what should be held back in a group of people.
Whatever emotions were within her always found expression, irrespective of the situation.
Now this Maharsa Mahadeva, the ultimate aim of all spiritual seekers, she has attained, she has attained with such effortlessness and has proved her worth.
To throw this life out of this body, without enduring the body, it takes something else.
One has to generate tremendous amount of energy which requires intense sadhana.
She knew the methods to achieve this and she was working towards this.
But at this stage, we never imagined that without my assistance, she will be able to generate the necessary energy.
Anyway, she would have trodden this path, but the swiftness with which she has achieved this is too much.
She made this possible with her love, probably the only thing she knew.
All her life, she was very proud that I am her husband.
Today I have to say that I am extremely proud that I happen to be her husband.
And above all, this is all the intensity that you look for in every disciple around you.
As a guru, this is of immense value too because it is this level of intensity that you always look for.
And plus, we will sing, praise my love curdly words to Phat
I took in first of all twenty-five years ago, twenty-six years ago.
Uh, Vizzy, my wife, she just came in front of me one day.
I just looked at her and I wanted her for various reasons.
I had things to do with her.
So I just looked at her and I didn't say anything.
Actually, it happened with some program happening, somebody else's program.
I went there and they asked me for lunch and I went and sat down.
I came in late. They were all eating and half way down I went and sat down.
You know, on the floor, in rows they're sitting.
I was sitting in this row. There was another row in front of me facing me.
And one more row facing away from me and another row facing me.
She's in that row. But then she was already looking at me.
Beyond these two rows. I just looked at her for two minutes.
And then I started eating my sambharan rice. Sambhar was good.
Then everybody started completing their meals before me because I came in late and I was eating late.
Then she finished her meal. She washed her hands. She came and she sat in front of me and burst out crying. So I didn't look at her. I kept on eating.
And I got up. I went and washed my hands and she came behind me.
She was still crying and crying and crying and crying.
Then she wanted to talk to me. I was not interested in talking.
I just smiled and I loved it at that. And those days no cell phone and you know.
So... See... again and again came up to me and she was crying and desperately wanting to talk.
I just wrote my home number and I gave it. And I said, only if I pick up you speak.
My dad picks up. Don't speak. He doesn't like young girls. Not anymore.
I came to know about Vijay when Sadhguru mentioned that he has met this person in Bangalore and she is a teacher in Sadhasthit Yoga and colleague or whatever.
And he wanted... he said... he expressed his desire to marry her.
And he wanted me to convey the message to my father or parents.
We were little bit... he was a little bit apprehensive about my father's response or whatever.
So I told him that I will break this news to my... our mother.
Then she will let him know about this.
She said, who? I said, her name is Vijay. I didn't know her full name.
I said, her name is Vijay. Then my mother was very happy.
My son is going to get married. So she went and told my father.
He... Oh, so this is strange. How is he going to get married? Who is she?
What's she? Then he came and asked, who is this?
He said that's her name and... I haven't spoken to her yet.
Then he asked, who is her father? He said, I don't know.
He said, what you don't know, who the parents are? You're talking about marriage?
He said, I am not intending to marry the father for sure.
No such intention. Only the girl. What caste? What creed? I did not know nothing.
Not did I care. I said nothing. There's no way.
So a lot of heat and this and they have their own investigations.
Going, who is this girl? How doable girls? She stabbed my son.
That girl doesn't even know that I'm talking all this.
And one day I just called her and said, you come. She didn't bang a lot. I said, come to my son.
She said, what do you mean, come? I said, just come.
So she was working in a bank and she just closed her work as quickly as possible.
She ran home and she told her parents, I'm going to work.
See, I wanted to understand the context of India. It's not United States where you can just say, I'm going and I'm never with a man.
That is an hard of an unthinkable, okay? She said, where?
Jaggery is calling me, I'm going. So who is this? I don't know who he is.
I got his phone number.
One day when we were talking, I mean usually in the evenings, once my husband used to go to the pharmacy, we used to sit on the steps and discuss so many things.
That particular day he told me, he met one girl. Her name is Viji and I want to get married to her.
So I told her, where is she? Where is she from? How does she look?
He said, no, I will bring her and introduce to you. And I want to inform my parents also.
This is, I'm informing you. So I told her, we will be very happy because we will have company more than a friend. She'll be my co-sister.
So I was very excited and eager to meet her. So I think after some time, he brought her to the shop where we have a medical store in Kalidasa Road.
So first when I saw her, her simplicity and her smile somehow attracted to me.
I asked Viji, how did she meet Sadhguru and how the marriage happened?
She said, with so much of clarity and so much of joy that she met Sadhguru in the class, the moment I met him, we knew each other so well in that very moment and that's it and that's marriage for me and all others are formalities.
And much later, I did not even know that that day it was a festival and me and Viji, we just rode up to Irpu where there's a waterfall and a small vanish for a temple.
And when I went there in the evenings, I saw one of the quaintest arrangements that you can see, all green-fronted small shops and little things, you know, little cattle show and everything.
It's all an assembly of maximum three hundred and five hundred people.
In a valley which is full of paddy fields, huge mountains on that side, a big waterfall and a little open temple here, and that whole setting was so fantastic and no electricity, everybody's got, you know, this fire, a pungus to light up the place, all green-fronted shelter, you know, you know what I'm saying?
This parka maram and this coconut fronds, using just that, all little little shops just set up for the evening.
But this thing just was so enchanting and then I asked what is this all about, then they said it's Mahasvara three today.
I did not even know because Mahasvara three was never celebrated in our homes for some reason. Then I, they asked what is this festival about, they said this is Shiva got married on this day.
Then I told Vijayak, we're getting married today.
Is it what? Is it the day I said yes, we're getting married today right here.
I said no, we've not told anybody, I said no need to tell anybody, I'm telling you, and we just got married right there.
Anyway, both the children will not listen to anybody. It's just there, this thing they came and it was not a permission per se, it was just informing them that I'm getting married.
Whether you like it or not, I'm getting married today. After a few days I told him this has to be legally this thing, which either registered or it has to be done again in some temple where there is some this thing, proof of the marriage.
So again we went to Shiva temple, an Anjan day short temple, an Anjan God.
And there we got the ceremony done, a single exchange of garlands, that's all given small this thing done by the remained priest there.
When they were newly married, they used to come near my shop to hang out. And I remember we had a big tree in front of my shop, so he used to lean and stand to that tree and Vijay used to stand next to him and she used to hold his hand and talk.
She never cared about the society or anything and she used to chat with him for a long time.
Yeah, they were always loving how he coupled if I could use that term. They were always glued to each other, smiling, chatting, that sort of thing. They were very happy couple.
They used to travel almost every weekend I can say. I mean we used to join them because Ravi couldn't close the shop and go, so they used to travel whenever possible we used to join them.
This happened, how many years ago, eighty-five, nineteen eighty-five, that's how much?
Twenty-nine years, thirty years almost.
So, when I married Vijay, she was only twenty-one years of age and she was born and brought up in Bangalore.
These twenty-one years, she had never stepped out of Bangalore City, she had never seen anything outside.
So, we rode down to Hampi and Badami, Aihalay, went to Kava, Gava, down to Kanya Kumari, Up Thirchandoor, Madurai, Koda Kannal, Kavambita, Mysaur and Dak.
So, the first place that I came is here.
And she had never seen a place like this and the level of excitement and she was all in tears, everything that she saw, she just burst into tears and cried.
Because it was so magnificent and well, I had many more stories to tell her than now, thirty years ago.
So, by end of nineteen eighty-five, I was a member of J.C.S. also that time.
So, one evening that J.C.'s meeting was there.
So, that time Sadhguru was there, so that time we call him as Jagi.
He gave introduction about that, as Yoga class, SSV.
So, that time Vijay had come there.
So, I used to do some little asanas before only, some cat stretch or something.
So, that time she used to...
I was like, you know, I'm not going to do this, I'm a big teacher.
And after that, he used to write a letter.
So, if he wants to come to Bangalore, he'll see how bad the sync-conducting a class can you arrange some parts prints.
So, we used to run around.
At that time, this is more or less how they lived.
I mean, Sadhguru would spend some time in his farm than he would spend.
He would spend half the month in his farm, another half the month he would teach a class, either in Hyderabad or in Mangalore or Kaimatore or Thirpur or one of these towns.
So, every weekend Vijay would travel to the initiation from my firm.
They used to travel by a sync bike.
One SD bike was there.
In that they used to travel.
The snick and nomads, they...
With all the luggage are tied to the sync bike, they used to come.
While coming, they used to come by jeans, jeans and jeans over Kotozaa and T-shirt.
So, once they...
While conducting class, they used to wear that.
White Kota and then Seetothi, she used to arrange a site for that.
She was very deeply devoted to Sadhguru as a person.
I wouldn't use the word guru like that, but definitely as a source to spiritual growth, she was definitely very deeply dedicated and devoted.
But at the same time, any games that Sadhguru and Vijay were in, there would be a fight.
They are just like friends, satising each other, you know, the way they...
..pull legs.
And Jagi, not only in the Ironhamtibhantil, not in the Lordo, like your second wife has come, see?
She used to tease him.
That kind of spiritual way.
She also constantly maintained an old posture that she had nothing to do with spirituality.
She was only interested in Sadhguru, the person, who happened to be her husband, and that was her only interest.
She kept now very clearly making this known again and again.
But again at the same time, I mean, one can't exist around Sadhguru, or one can't be associated with him in any way, unless in one way or the other, one is deeply tied to committed to one's own spiritual growth.
So, both existed at very high degrees.
First thing we went for a trek is from Subramania, track to Bangalore.
That time it was an arrow gauge.
This eighty is six, this track was only eighty-six.
This thirty-six kilometer stretch has over three hundred bridges and over a hundred tunnels.
Practically, you are either on a bridge or in a tunnel most of the time.
And it's wonderful, absolutely wonderful mountain.
Some bridges, if you just see, like you can see more than sixty, seventy feet tall, it is that kind of a bridges.
Some of the tunnels are over a kilometer long.
If you go into it in the night, even in the day it is pitch dark.
If you go into it, it's absolutely dark, means dark.
You can't see your hand like this.
After some time you don't know whether your eyes are open or closed.
It's that dark.
And the way Jagi used to look around for the six snakes, and when we entered a cave in the tunnel, that one thing was that one snake.
A little small one, but it looks so ferocious.
It just coiled and just as safe it is going to attack.
He wanted to catch it.
Then we, all of us we just screamed, don't touch it.
Because if something happens, we don't know how to go to take the singing.
Treatment for that.
So then he left it.
When we reached the sink, I think one city Margulou was there, that was the sixth station.
That time which is feet got boils because of that walking.
She couldn't thus sing, bare the pig.
So we both got to sing, just massage her leg and her sing.
Then there, the station master, he told, if you can't walk, there is a good train is to come.
So I will accommodate in it.
So back then there is a sing, a platform like with the singing, really.
So he made us sit in that.
It was a beautiful music.
He never was singing.
Forget that sing, train travel.
Ulaas was more or less like his own brother.
She was like his sister.
They would be chatting late in the night.
There were so many things, they would be laughing out.
Sadhguru would always be cracking some jokes.
So they would always be sitting and chatting.
Sometimes they suddenly decide we are going out again.
So we go all of us travel to the beach, we sleep there, we come back again in the morning.
And we have to rush because I had to go to school.
It was some sort of a hectic activity going on.
And Ulaas was always with them.
There is a place called Hanthi Honda.
Hanthi Honda means pigs place.
On the west coast there is a place called Hanthi Honda.
So Hanthi Honda Beach was my favorite beach.
And I couldn't believe it when...
Much, much later after I was married, when I took Viji to the ocean, she was what, twenty-two or something and she had never seen ocean in her life.
She lived in Bangalore all her life. She had never seen ocean.
And we just went and camped on the beach.
This west coast is so phosphorescent.
The phosphorescence in some areas is so high.
It was a full moon night and as the night gets darker and the...
You know, the tides get bigger. It's like lit.
It's like waves of phosphorous coming at you.
She just looked at this and he just got her.
Then we mostly sat through the whole night just looking at this thing and...
After that she went mad about the ocean.
She wanted to go to the ocean all the time.
Where you want to go? She wanted to go to the ocean.
She got addicted that night.
I mean, whoever knew Satguru or Viji, they always knew them as Jagi and Viji.
They were always together everywhere in everything that they did.
And many of these places, they even told her,
What's this you two people? You know, you're always together.
You're always talking. What is it that is there that's for you to talk so much?
And...but that's how they were.
And because there were constantly people around Satguru and their whole...
You know, there was no such thing as privacy for them.
So, it would be all kinds of talk. When you are there, it would be all kinds of talk.
And they...you know, it was almost that you didn't exist there.
And everything that needed to happen needed to happen.
And constantly there was, you know, so many things would come into focus.
Which, you know, you can also say it's part of the spiritual process, which will generally happen in a spiritual process.
