Now, we cannot really put definitions on happiness.
If you are happy, you will know it.
You are not happy, you will not know it.
That's all there is, isn't it?
No human experience can be defined as this is it, isn't it so?
Yes?
Can you define any of your experiences exactly like this?
It is not so.
So happiness is a certain state.
Happiness is the way you are.
It is not something that you think or it's not a concept in your head.
It is just an inner experience.
If you are happy, you know it.
When you are not happy, you don't know it.
And only when you know it, life happens to you.
Otherwise it doesn't happen to you, isn't it?
Only mind happens to you.
When life is happening to you, you are very happy.
When just mind is happening to you, sometimes you are happy, sometimes you are unhappy.
That's the big difference.
Now fundamentally, what we are trying to do here is moving you from thinking about life
to experiencing life.
Is it okay?
Yes.
Is it okay?
Yes.
Mowing you from thinking about life to experiencing life.
This life can only be experienced.
What you think, what you conceptualize, what you philosophize, it's of no meaning.
How intensely you experience it, that is how much you know it, isn't it?
So if you want to know it, what you should do, if you want to experience anything, how
deeply you respond to it is how deeply you experience it, isn't it so?
Yes.
If whether you want to know pain or pleasure, you have to respond to it, then only you can
experience it.
Unwilling to respond, you don't experience anything.
You hesitate to respond because some past experience tells you, if you just respond
in an unbridled way, somebody may take advantage of you, this may happen, that may happen,
negative things may happen to you.
That's the reason why you are holding it like this, isn't it?
Such a misunderstanding has entered you simply because you have gotten mixed up with action
and responsibility.
There is no distinction in your mind between action and responsibility.
All the time you think responsibility means compulsive action, not necessarily.
Responsibility is just giving you the ability to choose your action, please see.
When you truly see I am responsible for something, if it is necessary you will do something,
if it is not necessary you will learn to stay away from it, isn't it?
Only when you are not responding but reacting to situations around you, you will be in compulsive
action.
If you draw a clear line of distinction between responsibility and action, then responsibility
is never a burden on you.
