You said a little earlier that to be enlightened and to maintain the body, one would have to understand all the mechanics of the body.
Is that a possibility for us to be aware and understand all those possibilities, all those mechanics?
It definitely is a possibility. It's not that it is not possible.
It is just...
We are still going through hoops with fundamental aspects of life, basic aspects of life.
Then you can't pay the kind of attention that these things need.
If you...
If you have to know the intricacies of life, how life is made, if you want to know, rather let me use the word creation, it won't yield unless you paid the necessary attention, absolute attention.
This is the reason why people think it is long and arduous journey, need not be.
It is very long and arduous because...
See, suppose you drove from retroite, was it very long and arduous?
No, you're sitting in a twenty-first century car, what the hell?
In ten hours' time you're here. It is neither long nor arduous, okay?
Suppose your car is made like this, that its engine works intermittently.
Every minute it's on, every minute it's off.
Would it be very long and arduous?
Hmm? That's all.
That's all it is. Your attention is on and off, on and off, on and off.
So it's very long and arduous.
If your attention was just on, it's just a short journey.
It is not even a journey actually.
Opening your eyes to life is not really a journey.
But to understand the mechanics of how creation is, yes, a certain amount of focus and...
One thing is realization, a little bit of learning also.
Not a little bit, quite a bit of learning also is involved in it.
But without the necessary realization, learning won't mean anything.
So we are waiting for the realization.
If not the ultimate realization, at least some level of realization that you're not going through hoops for simple basic aspects of life.
If you stop going through hoops for tiny things in life, then it would be maybe time to look at how to learn a few things.
I've made attempts to set a few people on that.
I thought to all this should not be lost.
Right now I'm sort of resigned to that.
Anyway, this will be lost with me.
If people realize that's enough, we will set up procedures and methods and energy investments to help people towards that realization.
But all this knowing, I...
There was a time when I worked hard with people to get them there, but what I see is...
Even back in India, it's so difficult to get people to work hard towards these things, because this needs hard work, a lot of hard work.
If you're really longing to know it's not hard, everything is fine with you.
When there is no such longing, it feels like torture.
And initially you go into it willingly after you, after some time, you think, I'm torturing you.
This has happened again and again.
So I'm not given up, given up.
But generally I'm okay if...
If nobody gets there in terms of knowing, it's okay.
As long as people are on the path of realization, if they're not really striving to know the mechanics of creation, it's all right.
I mean, I'm not given up, given up, but I'm okay.
Because I have to work really hard with them, first of all.
Unless people are willing to work hard enough, trying to work hard with them just becomes ridiculous, you know.
Once I'm on, I don't know how to stop.
That's my problem.
If I sit here and if...
If I see little fire in somebody's eyes, I forget that you need to go to the bathroom, or eat to eat, because I forget that I need to go to the bathroom or eat.
So I forget about your bladder also.
Then I've forgotten about mine.
What's the problem with yours?
So once I'm on to something and I'm on, but I don't see people are like that.
People are on and off, on and off, on and off.
So it becomes difficult to work.
So we're just working towards realization.
If people attain towards that liberation, that's good enough.
A few people, we are still working.
I'm not saying there aren't anybody working.
There's some people working on those things, but...
The rate at which they're going, they will need a lot of time.
I don't think we have that much time on hands.
They will need lots of time at the pace at which they're going.
You can see if somebody is reading and studying and learning at a certain pace, you can say, okay, in eight years time, he can become a doctor.
If he's reading at a certain pace, you can say, okay, in fifty years time, he can become a doctor.
Yes?
Or if he's reading at a certain pace, you can see, okay, in a few lifetimes, he will become a doctor.
This is just like that. After all, it's physiology, on a deeper scale, that's all.
So if you're willing to learn at a certain pace, then we know how long it's going to take.
No, no, no, I'm doing, it's fine you're doing, but I don't want to... I just have a lifetime.
I don't have a three hundred here sentence.
I just have a life sentence here.
I'm not a guest here or something.
How do we speed up the process? Because the compulsions of the body and mind keep getting in the way.
How do we take care of the body and mind so they don't become hurdles?
How to take care of your body?
Don't make it important.
Or start with your mind.
What you think is not important. What you feel is not important.
Make that happen, let me see. Tomorrow is Easter, good Friday.
It's a good day to crucify you.
Yes, crucifixion means they fix somebody's body. Right?
It's a good day to fix your body.
You don't make it important. It just hangs there on the cross.
It's okay, let it just hang there.
Keep your mind, first crucify your mind. Let it just hang there.
Whatever it says.
If you have recognized somebody as an utter idiot, what do you do?
What do you do?
Suppose he happens to be your brother or your sister or your father or your husband.
I'm trying to make relative things properly.
What do you do?
See, you just let him be around.
Whatever he says, you don't stop him from speaking.
But in a way, you don't take it seriously.
Yes, that's what you do with your mind.
Let him say whatever he says, you know he's an idiot.
But you have a relationship with him.
So you let him say whatever he wants to say, not paying any attention to him.
Just the way, you know.
So you do that to your mind. That's crucifixion for your mind.
He just hangs there. You don't pay any attention to it.
Do that to your body later. First do it to your mind.
Body is an easy business compared to mind.
First do that to your mind. What you think and what you feel is not important.
Just do that to yourself. Let me see.
Because what you think and feel is just a psychological reality.
Only because you too caught up in the psychological reality, you're missing the whole reality.
All the time you're living within the psychological reality of who you are, not in the existential, isn't it?
So when will you look beyond the psychological?
If you think it's important, you'll never look beyond that, isn't it?
Because naturally your attention flows in the direction of whatever you hold is important, isn't it so? Yes?
Whatever you hold is important, your attention naturally flows in the direction.
Right now your thought and your emotion is important.
So naturally your whole attention is right there.
But that is a psychological reality that has nothing to do with the existential.
So if you want to know into the existential reality, to put it very simply you just have to see that I am a fool.
Whatever my mind says, whatever my emotion says, it has nothing to do with reality.
It has no greater relevance to life.
It's just shattering away with nonsense that you have gathered from somewhere else, isn't it?
If you understand this, don't pay any attention to it and don't expect anybody else to pay attention to it.
Yes, see, the best way to insult you right now, you know, is...
You're talking to me, I look at this guy.
You're saying something important, you're articulating your thought, but I don't pay any attention.
This is the worst insult, isn't it?
Why? Because your thought and emotion is so important, isn't it?
It is so... I'm looking at something so big, the sky.
But that is not how it is.
Your thought and emotion is bigger than the sky, isn't it so?
Right now it is, isn't it so?
The way you think and the way you feel is far bigger than the sky or the existence itself, isn't it so?
That is a very distorted perception of life.
It has to change.
Today, that's it.
What you think, what you feel, your thought and your emotion is of no consequence.
Make it like that for yourself.
You'll see, suddenly life will start bursting around here.
This is all we did in that...
Was that...
Maybe...
Hmm?
What?
BSP.
This is what we did, whatever you think, whatever you feel, your story, your nonsense is not important, not strong important.
That's all that was done to you and suddenly life started bursting within you, isn't it?
Do that, this is a good Thursday.
