I was not keeping any track of Zigtime. Still, I can tell you that in 1985-86 she was sick.
They were in Mysore. From there they used to come to, I think maybe till 1987-88.
Then from there they moved to the island, which is place. They were there for some time.
It is in Sahajasthiri Yoga Program. It was then called. The Isha Yoga Program was in Sahajasthiri Yoga Program. It used to be 13 days program at that time. It would start on a Monday.
And the Sunday in between is when we would have the initiation day. We would get initiated in Shunya meditation.
So this was a whole day program. And so we had games in the morning when the game started.
Suddenly somebody dominated. Somebody's presence dominated very intensely in that day.
It was Vijin. Making the whole place very dynamic. Be it the hall, be it the food and dining.
Everything was a huge celebration suddenly from a silent class to a celebration.
During initiation as you know there is a Guru Puja that happens.
And this Guru Puja, when it happened, there were not a Sadhguru.
Along with Sadhguru another lady was also there. And both of them were doing Guru Puja together.
My eyes were closed. But the Guru Puja, the sound, the synchronisation of those two voices was awesome.
The whole Guru Puja itself was so beautiful.
Once the Guru Puja was over, everybody opened their eyes, they stood up and up.
But this lady who was doing Guru Puja along with Sadhguru, she started crying.
She was crying so vehemently like really from the depth of her being, she was crying.
It was like that. She was crying and Sadhguru hugged her.
This, you know what's Guru Puja? On the initiation day, you know they were mumbling something that you could not understand.
You remember it? Okay.
This particular Guru Puja is known as Shor Desho Pachara. Shor Desha means sixteen.
Sixteen ways of treating a Guru, that's the process. Why the sixteen ways is, is got something to do with the one hundred and twelve chakras in the bandine.
So, this is sixteen ways of treating a Guru. It's a certain way of making your system.
You can make your body into such a way that it becomes an invitation to the Divine.
Then after that, I usually go for initiation in different towns as a volunteer. So, wherever I go for the initiation, she will be with Sadhguru.
So, during the initiation, we often meet, get to talk to her. So, the initiations will be looking for days.
Like, we'll be walking somewhere. Okay. The weekend, we can know movies and I think we will travel to Thirpur, Karu.
So, once we see Sadhguru and Vijika, all hell breaks. Like, hell breaks. How do you perceive it? I don't know.
But for us, it is very joyous and the happy moments. And the above all, we all sing together and do it.
Those times, we know only movie songs. Then, Sadhguru introduced Om Namabha Bhagavadhi Vassadaya because we are all over the place.
We are like… We don't know what we are doing, but Vijika gave the tune to it.
Om Namabha Bhagavathi Vassadaya
Om Namabha Bhagavathi Vassadaya
I saw Vijji in all these programs right from my first initiation days.
She was a matter of immense interest to me because she had many fisceted to her personality.
She will switch from being exuberant to absolutely still. She will sit quiet. I wouldn't understand.
I would see her two minutes ago, just jumping, jaggy, jaggy, this, that, pulling his leg.
And next moment, I will see her just sitting quiet in a corner.
So, I used to think in those days, I used to find her personality very interesting, how she could switch from one to another effortlessly.
And I would see that when she was quiet, she was really quiet and when she was into activity, she was totally into the activity.
First time, you know, when I was in Tamil not about eleven, twelve years ago, whatever time, I didn't know a word of Tamil.
Then suddenly, we started program in Tirupur.
The first program I conducted in English, fifty percent, they understood.
The second program I went and sat there. I saw one, thirty percent of the people were so eager, but they just sat with blank faces.
English, English, English, English and then I thought, okay.
Then, you know, our Swahana-tan was there.
Then translation business started.
I was volunteering the first class. I was sitting behind the class.
Satguru and Vijyama came and Vijyama handed over a notebook and a pen and she asked me to take the class line by line notes.
So, I said, why you do a teacher?
When that class was coming to an end or close, Satguru called me and said, why don't you teach this in Tamil?
Then I said, yes, I said.
Then Vijyama said, you have a first teacher. In the presence of Satguru, you are going to do this.
So, accepted Swaminathan's sisya.
When we wanted to switch, when I said, I'm going to train the first batch of teachers, you should have seen the level of resistance. They thought, I have fallen.
Okay. Can anybody else teach this program? Is it possible?
The program is conducted in such a way. See, today it is little more standardized.
At that time it is freewheeling. I thought the program, whichever way I wanted.
So, they said, no way anybody else can teach this program.
No way. We will not attend another teacher's program.
Now there are people coming to me and telling me,
Satguru, your teachers, they're better than you. I said, that's great.
Nine of us were in the teacher's training. It was held in Vallanda Imeram near Polaji.
We were in 1991.
During that thing, she was teaching the Guru Puja.
Teacher means she'll be like a tiger.
Whatever the pronunciation goes this way, she'll say once again.
Start from the beginning.
And she'll sit and correct, sit and correct.
Come on. Face the wall. Face the wall and chant again, chant again, chant again.
It meticulously. Everything, even our address.
What type of address you have to do? Because lady teachers have come up at that time and she'll used to ride.
And her knowledge about the program is so deep and immense.
Whenever we were in the training program, she used to be there with us.
The questions we asked, I'm not saying Satguru don't understand that.
He knows. But those days when I'm asking the question, that question is real to me.
I think he is not getting the question. That's how I see.
His intention is different. So, the ji ka will support me.
From the same direction, she will ask the question.
Till I get the point, she'll pursue it.
Any teachers meet or any meeting, you know, Vijay would be the first one to question him.
And question him on such basic terms and, you know, such direct terms.
I think, you know, it kind of established, defined and established a certain quality that's there in each other.
I mean, people who are not gullible, naive and dumb, but at the same time, people who are deeply dedicated.
I mean, when it comes to questioning, the way our people question is.
Something very, you know, very incisive.
At the same time, when it comes to following, the way our people follow instructions or the way our people receive things is also exceptional.
I think Vijay personified both these ends.
She had a much more better understanding of spirituality than any of us had.
In one of the times, Saguru mentioned me that Vijay understands the classes much better than the other two teachers' name that he took.
I said, how are you saying there day and night teaching?
And Vijay is not even here. She is not attending any classes. She is not teaching any classes.
She's saying, you don't understand now, but later you will understand. She understands the class.
She has much more experience. She has much more potential.
At one point, when Saguru stayed in my house for 13 days program, Vijay also came and stayed for a couple of days.
So I think that was another time that we really connected big time.
We used to discuss many, many things right from clothes to fashion to nails and...
Even now, if I just think of her, it is here. It is always Anna Hatha throbbing person.
That was my first memory. Still, it is green with me, my first meeting with Saguru and Vijay.
Another incident I could say is after a few years, Vijayaka was...
I was sitting behind the class. Saguru was handling the initiation class.
Vijayaka came running from behind and sat by the side of me and said,
Do you know the role of yourself in the previous part which Saguru is such? She said,
No, I am searching for it, I said. She said, I found out.
And she said, I was sister.
Long back before is Samsar Samadhi.
The same thing after the Samadhi, when Sadhguru read out. That was true.
So she was very close to Sadhguru in such a way that her previous lives, everything she was able to know of. So yes, she has taken him as a ultimate guru, or Shiva.
And in those days, he'll struggle for Tamil.
But in English classes, if you see, his eyes will close like this.
When his eyes close like this, something different from him will come out.
The speeches then Vijayaka say, Yes, gone inside.
This class will last another half another, she will say.
So that's how she was very close with Sadhguru also in each and every activity.
Yes.
This is those days, no yoga center, those days I am talking about.
So Sadhguru has to travel and come and stay and conduct programs.
So Vijayama will come.
So in few months, most of the centers have become our family link.
So whoever gets wet dead or marriage, they will invite us first, first of all.
So we will go, when we go, Sadhguru, Vijayaka and the gang will follow.
It's a fun, always, wetting means we will go dance, we will play, then we will eat 100% stomach full and enjoy and come.
She used to tell me, see, why can't you carry me?
See, Sadhguru, she was so, oh my, Jagi was so team man, I was like, she was in half-time.
He used to do this, so phantom.
Because she was like, you know, another person.
That time she gets angry.
She is telling me, I have got her some other girl's or two, if I carry, I don't know what, what is going to happen to me.
Thank you.
