I'm sure people at work think this yoga is a damn distraction from your work.
And I'm sure many families are beginning to think that this yoga is a serious distraction from their family business.
Isn't it so?
I'm just saying this to you.
Unless all of you are here.
So, how to find intensity in my sadhana?
You cannot do just your sadhana with great intensity and do the rest of your life in a tepid way.
It's not possible to do that.
If you bring intensity into every aspect of your life, your sadhana also will find intensity.
Just doing sadhana alone in an intense way and conducting your life like a mob cloth just won't work.
You must bring intensity to everything, just everything.
Then people at work won't complain.
People in the family won't complain. They'll all enjoy it.
Nobody will complain because they find a new intensity has come and who doesn't want life in an intense way?
They've given up, that's different. But who doesn't want it?
Does anybody not want it? Everybody wants it.
People have given up as not possible, that's all.
Nobody doesn't want it, there's no such thing.
So, trying to bring intensity only into your sadhana, if that is the way you think of life, you must make your life into sadhana.
There is no other way.
Morning sadhana, evening sadhana, lest at the time I just drag myself through life, it will not work like that.
You have to make every aspect of your life into your sadhana.
After all what does sadhana mean? Sadhana means a device.
You're employing your body, your breath, your mind, your emotion as a device to move yourself to your higher possibility.
Can't you use... you're walking down the Mumbai street as a device to do that? Can't you?
Can't you use your activity in your workplace as a way, as a stepping stone for a higher level of balance in capability?
Can't you do that? Can't you do your home situation for that?
People have always told you, you must be useful.
Forget about such nonsense. I'm saying just use everybody.
Use everybody as a device so that you become a better human being by the moment.
Every day, measure it at the end of the night and see, end of the day and see.
Are you a little better human being today than what you were asked today?
By using all these people, you're anywhere using them, but you're not using them properly. That's the only problem.
Aren't you using people around you? No, no, I love them. That is using them.
You're emotionally using them. Without them, you'll be broken, isn't it? Yes or no?
You like straight words or deceptive words? Straight words? Straight words means physically, mentally, emotionally, spiritually.
Use everybody around you so that every day, every moment, you are becoming a better human being.
Then you're putting everybody to good use.
If you are using people to get frustrated, depressed, miserable, then you're misusing them.
Isn't it? Your well-being is never, never against anybody's well-being.
If you're thinking of using people towards a small goal, then it could be against them.
If you're using people for your ultimate well-being, it is never, ever against them.
They will also benefit, you will also benefit.
Now, to bring intensity, these are all complementary to each other.
You need to understand this. By doing sadhana, yes, life could become intense.
By conducting life with a certain sense of awareness, your sadhana could become intense.
So they are not separated and they can never be separated.
The sadhana has to become twenty-four hours. Everything that you do, you're using to see how,
by the next moment, I can be a little better than what I am right now.
If this doesn't enter your life, if you don't have such a passion, that constantly,
you're seeing how to make this life into your highest possible reality that you can make it.
If you don't have such a passion, there is no spiritual path in your life.
So, generate a passion. It's called each other.
Develop a great desire that I want to be like that.
Don't think whether it's possible or not possible.
Whether it happens or it doesn't happen is not the issue.
You lived your life burning for the highest possibility in that burning itself is liberation.
In that burning itself is mukti, because once you have said to yourself,
I think we were just now singing this, nish chalatatam jivan mukti.
That's all it takes.
If you're changing your direction, every few moments, now you think,
what's happening on the street is a distraction.
What's happening in the office is a distraction. What's happening at home is a distraction.
They are not distractions. They're all spiritual tools.
Use all of them, whichever way they come.
Your husband can be a good spiritual tool, if you know how to make use of him.
Your wife can be a good spiritual tool. Your boss can be even your mother-in-law.
Oh, what a wonderful spiritual tool.
Without her you wouldn't know where you stand, isn't it?
Yes. Without her you wouldn't know the depths of your frustration, your misery, and...
Isn't it so?
So, if you have a single-minded passion towards something, everything is supportive to you.
These things, this question is a very classic question, because these teachings have gone on for a long time.
How the distractions of family, distractions of business, distractions of the marketplace,
all these things should be avoided. You must sit in a quiet, nice forest or gone cave.
Himalayan cave and how suddenly your mind will get focused and something will happen.
Did you meet anybody like that?
Sitting in the Himalayan cave, unable to keep their mind anywhere, people are just smoking themselves to some state.
Okay? Because they are not able to keep their mind anywhere.
So, this kind of teachings, this kind of mission, you know, misunderstandings for a very, very long time, breathes this question.
This is not just her question, I think. This question has been asked for ages.
Once there was a Jewish man.
And he invited a friend for dinner.
The friend came.
He served him a wonderful dinner. He ate, served a nice desert. He ate.
When you're just about to leave, he made a bill for $800 and gave it to him.
The friend said, what is this?
He said, it's a bill for the dinner. That you're the evening that you enjoyed.
He said, you invited me to your home. And you're giving me a bill?
Yes, I asked you to come, but you came, did you enjoy the evening?
You ate well? You have to pay?
He said, this is not fair.
There is no fair, not fair. Why did you invite me?
Okay, you walk on the main street, even the man in the restaurant invites you.
So you go there and eat and say, you invited me? What nonsense? You have to pay?
Then he said, no, this is not right.
This is not according to the rules of hospitality in our community.
Let's go to the rabbi.
Whatever he says, we will do that.
They went to the local rabbi and they presented this case.
The local rabbi said, you have to pay $800.
And that man said, see, I gave the bill for the dinner, but now he dragged me here to your place.
I had to bring him in my car and now I have to drop him somewhere.
So he has to pay another $100.
The rabbi said, it's correct. You have to pay $900, not $800.
The guy thought, okay, this is some insane world.
But now the rabbi also says that, what the hell?
And he pulled out his wallet and started counting out the money.
Then this man said, you come with me. He took him aside and said, you don't have to pay.
He said, why? Then why did you put me through all this nonsense?
He said, I just wanted to show you what a lousy rabbi we have.
We have had these lousy people for a long time who have been constantly telling you, your family is a distraction,
Mumbai is a distraction, go to the mountain.
You are the only distraction.
Then all the distraction. Yeah.
