8 Wind
…aimt i mora li'gut.
See, you're, let's say, your children.
You're good to them, as far as you know how to be.
Are you good to them because of morality?
Because somebody has told you you should not kill your children.
Is that the reason why you're not killing them? Are you being good to your children and not killing them?
Because somebody has told you that you must be good to your children.
That is good morals. Is it so?
So why are you so good to them?
Why do you love them? Why not somebody else?
Why are they your children?
Because in some way you see them as a part of yourself, doesn't it?
In some way you see them as a part of yourself.
Do they grow up and turn your enemies sometimes?
Still somewhere, as soon as you're concerned, you see them as a part of yourself that you're able to look beyond all their nonsense, all their problems, all their everything.
And still reach out to them, isn't it?
Simply because you see them as a part of yourself.
Yes, that's all the thing, isn't it?
So anything that you experience as a part of yourself with that you don't need morality, obviously, isn't it so?
Yes. Are you understanding what I'm saying?
Because you just leave out one step and when we go there again you go back to the number one step.
So anything that you experience as a part of yourself with that you do not need any morality, is it so?
You don't have to try to be good, morality means you're trying to be good, isn't it?
So yoga means to experience everything as a part of yourself.
Right now, let's say you gave birth to your child.
It could have happened to many of you, you don't know.
And in the hospital they interchange your children with somebody else.
You bring this child, this was born biologically to somebody else, but you believe this is yours.
And you love this child any less, you're involved with the child any less, you're the any and not there.
But still you love it.
So it is just your willingness to include somebody who you're capable.
It is not that it has to come from your body.
It is just that if you're willing it's possible, isn't it?
If you're little more sensible maybe you adopted a child and allowed this child as much as anybody.
Why you did not bear your wife or your husband to you?
They were born by somebody else and generally your husband's were born by that horrible woman called mother-in-law.
But you love that man, isn't it? Isn't it so?
So it is just a question of your willingness.
If you're willing you can experience everything as a part of yourself.
When you experience everything as a part of yourself you do not need morality.
When you know the vulgarity of what is you and what is not you only then you need morality.
Otherwise no morality.
But either the person who experienced everybody as himself need morality.
With morals you're only trying to be good, you will never become good to pleases.
You can hold back your hands but you can't hold back your mind, isn't it?
Here you...
You can hold back your physical body, can you hold back your mind?
It goes everywhere, it does everything, isn't it?
How do you certify yourself I'm a good man?
You look at this one, he's not okay, she's not okay, she's not okay, he's not okay.
Compared to all this people, I am a good man, isn't it?
If you want to be really good you have to make everybody in the world not okay.
Please see, those people who think they're very good in their minds, nobody's okay, isn't it so?
Have you noticed this?
If nobody's okay in the world, it is not a question of goodness, it just means you're sick in your head.
That's what it means.
Yes or no?
If nobody in the world is okay, what does it mean?
You know one of the things that your psychiatrist or psychologist will tell you is
if you start thinking everybody's not okay that means you're heading for insanity,
yes?
Because it is madness.
And your goodness is just a kind of madness.
Maybe it's needed to keep some balance in the society sometimes,
but not for your evolution, your morality will not involve you.
If you begin to recognize life as life, then you will see.
As life you respond to life and you don't need morals, you know how to be.
You will never cross any lines because there are no lines, but at the same time
you are simply incapable of doing anything harmful. That's all.
You're not holding back, you're not controlling because somebody told you
this is the way you must be, you should not do that, you should not do this.
The very way you are, there is no question of harm.
It doesn't exist in you.
Effortlessly you can be good right now with great difficulty you'll be good.
