In India, the conventional teaching is that for people with social lives, it's important
to decrease the Maya.
There's a conflict in my mind since other teachings are saying to just accept and live
in the moment.
Does one necessarily have to give up outside things?
Do you understand what's Maya?
Do you know what's Maya?
The word Maya literally means illusion.
So there is a whole teaching that the whole existence is just an illusion.
It has come from a different consciousness altogether, but intellectually when you understand what
it means is everything around you is illusion.
Your body's illusion, your existence is illusion, the world is illusion.
Everything that you perceive is illusory.
Yes?
That's what Maya means.
So those of us who have a social life, we must reduce the Maya.
How to reduce the illusion?
Can you reduce or increase the illusion?
Either you are in it or you are out of it, isn't it?
Is it possible to reduce the illusion?
Can you?
Can you reduce or increase an illusory state?
Reduction and increasing is more illusion, isn't it?
Illusion is illusion.
Illusion means you are not in reality.
That's all.
If you are not in reality, can you reduce or increase it?
No.
If you increase it, more illusion.
If you reduce it, deeper illusion, isn't it?
Isn't it so?
Because once you are in a dream, in the dream you think you are out of the dream.
This is a very bad dream, really entangled in the dream, isn't it?
So this Maya, say if you want to make a journey, this is one thing that you must remember.
Don't try to start where Krishna was.
Don't try to start where Jesus was.
Don't try to start somewhere else.
If you want to start a journey, if you are serious about making a journey, you must start
from the seat in which you are sitting right now, isn't it?
If you try to start from somewhere else, your whole journey becomes illusory.
Somebody is starting from there.
Biggest problem with humanity is just this.
They are always trying to start from third step to heaven.
They are not willing to start from there, they are, what is your reality?
When you are in your experience, your home, your wife, your children, your job, your
body, is this illusion of reality?
It's reality, isn't it?
Then why do you think it's illusion?
Because Krishna says so?
How do you know Krishna is speaking the truth?
A man who is 5,000 years ago, how do you know what he said?
How do you believe?
When you don't believe the man who is sitting next to you, how do you believe a man who
was 5,000 years ago or 2,000 years ago?
Just because everybody is saying so, isn't it?
Because your culture is saying so, isn't it so?
I am not saying Krishna did not know, but how do you know?
Do you have a way to check it up?
Do you have a way to check up whether what Krishna said is true or not?
Do you have a way to check up whether what Jesus said is true or not?
Do you have?
Do you just believe because in your culture they are encouraging you to believe, isn't
it?
Yes?
If you are born in India, everything that Krishna said is true.
You are born here, everything that Jesus said is true, how do you know?
They could be the biggest liars in the world, how do you know?
You have no means to check them up, isn't it?
You have only your experience.
In your experience right now everything around you, is it reality or illusion?
It's reality.
If you believe it's illusion, then you will get into ridiculous states.
You go and tell your wife, see your actual in illusion, she'll knock you into reality.
Big time isn't it?
You can't believe many things, but what is your experience of life?
Is it illusion?
Hard reality isn't it?
So you must work from where you are, only then you will get somewhere.
If you first of all accept where you are right now, next step and the next step and the next
step, you will get somewhere.
If you try to start from somewhere where you are knocked, definitely your journey will
become illusory, isn't it?
So don't worry about my end.
You're real, aren't you?
I am real, I'm telling you.
Everything that's happening in your life is real in your experience, isn't it?
You're pain, you're suffering, I am telling you, suffering is self-created, I am not telling
you suffering does not exist.
You're suffering is real, isn't it so?
Is it real or not when it happens to you?
It is created by you, but it is very, very real in your experience, isn't it so?
Even if it's just, say you thought something, you thought this person is doing something
to you, she is not even aware of it, but you just thought this person is doing something
to you.
Just this thought, the suffering that it causes for you is real, isn't it so?
Even though it is imagined, what you imagined about her is imaginary, still the suffering
is real in your experience, is it so?
If I tell you it's Maya, will it go away?
Because I don't have it, I can tell you your suffering is Maya.
See, your suffering is illusory, I can tell you because I am not in it, it is very real,
painfully real, isn't it?
But it is self-created.
Do you see this?
Whatever suffering that happens within you, obviously is created by you, isn't it?
I will throw an abuse at you.
That is my problem.
Suffering is caused by you, isn't it?
Yes?
So, let's start from where we are.
Don't try to start from somewhere else, it'll lead to your whole distortion of reality.
Don't try to reduce or increase the Maya, you cannot do that.
You cannot do, you cannot downscale the illusion or upscale the illusion, isn't it?
If you are an illusion, you are an illusion.
The only way is to wake up, there is no other way.
It is from this context that they told you everything is Maya, because you are living
in the mind, you are living through the mind.
You are looking at life through the distortion of mind, so everything is illusory.
Not that reality doesn't exist.
