So this is a teleneem.
When would anybody do service?
Suppose you have a child.
If you feel this child, would you think that I am doing a great service?
But you can say, Joy for you to do it.
Now there is a child on the street.
Somebody's, you don't know who's.
Now you pick up this child and feed this child.
Now you think you're doing a great service.
What's the difference?
With this child you have some love feeling.
With that one you don't have.
So it is a great service which will earn you marks to go to heaven.
Don't do any service.
Please don't ever do any service in this world.
If you have love in your heart, if your humanity is alive, whatever you wish to do, you do.
If it's not alive, you live it.
Because you wanting to do service comes with so many expectations.
There was a emperor in China whose name was Hu.
In Chinese language, Hu can be pronounced either Hu or Hu, Emperor Hu or Hu.
The great emperor and he heard about Gautamadukutta spreading enlightenment everywhere.
He wanted him to come to his land and spread enlightenment.
He sent many messages and messengers, but Gautamad did not come because of his ill health and
what.
But in the meantime, Emperor Hu built, because Gautamad eats meditation halls, Emperor Hu
built meditation halls all over his country in every city.
And because Gautamad lacked flower gardens, he set up huge flower gardens waiting for
Gautamadukut to come.
Gautamad not even started the journey.
And it was decided that this man is waiting so much and all the preparation is ready.
So one of Gautamad's disciples, a fully enlightened disciple, decided to come, make
the journey.
His name was Bodhidharma.
Bodhidharma, for Tamil people and teal hours, you have something in Bodhidharma.
Bodhidharma was the prince of the Kanchi kingdom in south.
He was the son of Kanchi king son.
He was.
He took to, he went after Bhutan and went this way.
Twenty-two-year-old boy, fully enlightened, enlightened.
A great being.
Along with two other disciples, he walked on and Bodhidharma was the one who discovered
tea because for the meditator staying awake is the biggest problem.
They were a hill called Thai.
Once again Thai is also pronounced as Chai.
So on this hill when they were meditating and disciples falling asleep, somebody discovered
that if you just block this hill, put it in the water, suddenly everybody's wide awake.
So Chai became popular drink.
Among the puttis and slories played in India.
Huge plantations came up and you know, it's worldwide to me.
So Bodhidharma and this disciple, two disciples crossed the Himalayas, news went to Emperor
U, but an enlightened one is coming.
Emperor U made huge preparations for celebration.
When the enlightened one comes, the whole nation should celebrate, big preparation.
But they don't know which day he will come.
See, tomorrow your president or somebody is coming here to Chicago, some celebration
doing it is okay.
You don't know which day he will land.
Keeping it ready every day.
Not an easy thing.
But they kept it up.
Because the enlightened one is coming, they want to have a huge celebration nationwide.
Then they were sighted on the other side.
Messenger's went and told Emperor who came and set up a camp, just at the border of his
empire, a huge reception committee.
Bodhidharma and these two disciples walked into the camp.
The emperor who looked at Bodhidharma felt totally disappointed.
Because the emperor who was imagining an enlightened man means he'll be somehow.
This is just a twenty-two-year-old boy with a shaven head.
Emperor who was over seventy-three years of age.
He looked at him at disappointment, but anyway he welcomed him, made him sit down.
And as this had little settling down, Emperor who asked, can I ask you a question?
He said, I'll turn down.
Yes, many.
Bodhidharma, so far means he's just come travelling.
Now if he had asked how the weather in India, how he's got to myself, how something else,
he would have spoken.
Emperor who asked, what is the source of my being?
Bodhidharma looked at him and laughed.
He laughed and said, that's a very stupid question.
Ask something else.
Now this was the top of the line question in the emperor's mind.
He's conducted hundreds of debates on this particular question, what is the source of
my being?
And this boy who comes from nowhere laughs this great question and dares to call it a
stupid question.
He got really angry, but he held back because he enlightened man.
Held back and asked the next question, what is the source of this existence?
How Bodhidharma really laughed about?
He said, that's an absolutely idiotic question.
Ask something else.
He's looking about weather, got to myself, how old, you know, how was the journey?
Did you enjoy the Himalayas?
Now the emperor was in great distressing anger, but he held back and asked the third question.
He made a list of all the things that he has done.
All the good things that he has done in his life as an emperor, how he has fed the people,
how he has done this, how he took care of the people and how he even built meditation
halls for Gautama, how he has hired translators, thousands of translators who teach Gautama's
teaching in Chinese, everything that he has done, a whole list he produced.
Now that I have all done all this, will I get nibana?
Nibana means nibana, almighty ultimate liberation, will I get it?
Now Bodhidharma became serious.
He stood up, glad down and attended his huge big eyes.
He said, one, you, you will burn in the seventh hell.
And the emperor who got so angry, he threw him out of his kingdom.
But Bodhidharma, there is no problem.
Himana and Sajna, the worst problem he went and said, down the thai hill drinking tea.
People anyway came.
Why the story is, now in the Buddhist way of life they are looking at mind as seven layers.
When he says, you will burn in seventh hell, he is saying you are in the lowest level
of the mind.
First thing you do something, next thing you keep account of it, this is the lowest level
of the mind.
Out of your love you want to do something, you do.
If your humanity beats and wants to do something, you do it.
But never do something as a service to anybody.
There is no service you can render to anybody.
When you have love in your heart, if you get an opportunity to do something, you must be
extremely grateful that you got the privilege to do it.
If it is not so, please don't do it.
If you are going to do something and keep accounts, you will sink into the lowermost
depths.
This is happening.
You do something to somebody and you expect something else from them, but they don't fulfill
your expectations.
Your misery is untold, isn't it?
Within the family, outside the family, among friends, among neighbors, they forget this
problem.
Yes?
When you do something, you do what you want to do.
If you don't want to do, you leave it.
For everything there is a consequence.
For doing there is a consequence, but not doing there is a consequence.
As long as you are going to walk through the consequence joyfully, it doesn't matter.
What is the end result?
So don't do service to anybody.
If your humanity beats, do it.
Otherwise, don't do it.
But if your humanity doesn't beat, that means you are not human.
Isn't it?
If you simply sit here as a human being without being identified with anything, do you see
there is something within you which beats for everything in the existence?
Yes?
Only if you think, no, I am this, I am that, now you think, okay, it's alright to kill
this person.
But if you simply sit here as a human being, there is something within you which beats
for all life.
So that's why I am telling you that there was definitely, I asked you, do you want to
be a full-time human being or a part-time human being?
If you are a full-time human being, everything that you can do, you will naturally do, isn't
it?
Nobody has to tell you what you cannot do.
You don't.
I cannot change.
