He said, the last thing that a human being ever gives up is their suffering.
And why?
I didn't say that.
No, I didn't say you said that.
But I believe that to be true.
The first thing that a human being should give up is suffering.
No, no, no.
What this…
No, no, this is my core.
This is my core.
Good.
All right.
The first thing that a human being should give up is suffering.
And if you're ready for the next one, there is no need to give up suffering because there's
no such thing as suffering unless you create it.
There is no need to give it up because it doesn't exist.
Are you right now suffering?
No.
So where is the need to give it up?
There is no need to give it up because it doesn't exist.
Why would you create suffering for yourself?
Because you know not what you're doing.
Yes or no?
You don't know what you're doing with yourself.
That's why you create suffering.
Otherwise, why would you create suffering for yourself?
That's not your intention, isn't it?
No.
There's lots there is a life where I…
It's awesome and there's others there is a life where I create suffering and I want
to do whatever I can to eliminate suffering because it's…
I'm asking you, why do you want to eliminate suffering?
Right now.
Are you suffering?
Right now, right now, right now.
Yeah.
I mean, I…
Yeah.
It hurts bad.
That is my…
It hurts, but are you suffering right now?
Right.
Geez.
You're not in any state of suffering obviously, isn't it right now?
It's very obvious to anybody who sees your face.
You're not in any state of suffering.
But if you do this, it hurts and then you could go into suffering.
Yes?
So the possibility of you're saying this from past experience of life.
Leave the past.
Now are you suffering?
That's all I'm asking.
No.
No.
So there is no suffering right now.
So that you cannot eliminate it either.
So next moment, there may be suffering.
How did that happen?
Attachment to the past, labeling to the past.
Right now, there is no suffering, but next moment suffering happened to you, let's say.
How did it happen?
You created it.
Why are you creating something that you don't want?
That's my question.
No, no, no.
Why would anybody create?
Why would anybody create what they don't want within themselves?
See, I'm trying to do something on the outside.
It may not happen my way because there's so many people here.
There is a million different forces have to cooperate with me if I have to create something
on the outside, isn't it?
With the interior it's just me, isn't it so?
Only one ingredient.
So if something that I don't want is happening within me, why?
Obviously, I'm unaware.
I do not know what I'm doing with myself, is it?
So you do not know what you're doing with yourself right now simply because you're
lost in past and future business.
Does past exist?
No.
Does it exist?
No.
No.
Does future exist?
No.
That's future business.
I've got all these voices now.
No.
You're suffering is like this right now.
What happened 10 years ago?
You can still suffer, isn't it?
What may happen day after tomorrow?
You can already suffer.
Is that so?
So you're suffering that which is non-existent show.
If you're suffering that which does not exist, what should we call you?
Freak whatever makes you happy, I don't care.
It's insanity, isn't it?
Yeah.
If you're suffering something that does not exist, is that sanity or insanity?
Please tell me.
Insanity.
Insanity.
Just because all you guys have ganged up and formed a majority of insane people, does
it become the right thing?
Just because you become the majority, does it become the right thing?
No.
No.
But it's a damn democracy.
The majority is right.
See, if it was only you who are suffering and nobody else suffers in this world, you
would know that you're a free call.
Now the problem is you have too much company, isn't it?
We're all characters in the Star Wars environment.
You ever seen that?
You have too much company and it looks like the right thing.
If nobody else on this planet is suffering, everybody is utterly blissful and you were
the only one suffering, does it take long for you to realize that you're some kind of
a free call?
No.
Because you have a one-asked company, that looks like the right thing.
If somebody is utterly blissful, you think he's the free call.
Why?
Why do you think a Socrates gets poisoned?
Why does a manzor gets down to death?
Why does a Jesus get crucified?
He's simply because in a vast number of mad people, one man who's talking sanity looks
insane.
He must be put to an end.
There is no other way.
There are done that today too.
But today the loss won't permit that, so they crucify you in different ways.
They haven't stopped yet, they haven't stopped yet.
Methods have changed.
They let loose the tax man, the policeman, and this is the way they do it.
Those days they did it in different ways.
Because one sane man is an insult for all the insane people, isn't it?
Do we learn how to suffer now and suffer?
I'm sorry?
Do we suffer because we learned that suffering exists and that's what…
Not that you learned.
You suffer because you have become a slave of your mind.
If you were running your mind, you wouldn't be suffering.
Your bloody mind is running you.
That's the problem, isn't it?
Yes or no?
If you were conducting the mind, would you make it into a blissful process or a suffering?
Yes.
Right now the mental process is running you.
That's the problem.
Who should be a boss?
Who should have been the boss and who should have been the slave has gotten reversed?
That's the whole problem.
