A
Vinci Beginning show
Vinci is a place but Talia is from a banrio
Her family is a large family and a lot of women, sisters.
Her father was a very strong lady.
Her father had a watch shop and her father's pet was very dear to her father.
She won't talk much about her parents at all to me, but I have been there to the place and I have met them also.
But she's never spoken much about them.
I think she had three or four sisters and one brother.
One of my youngest daughters, sister was very close to her.
She had come once to my romance.
After me, she met Sadhguru.
I don't think she connected to anybody.
It is all Him.
It is all only Him.
And everything, everything is jaggy, jaggy, jaggy.
Without jaggy, nothing moves in her life, you know.
And she will say,
I'm not mad after Him.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I know you're not mad after Him.
She's mad after Him, but she will say,
I'm mad after Him. I think it is. She will say.
There was something about her.
She was a wonderful person. In my experience, I found her very wonderful.
I found her very easy to connect with, very easy to gossip with, very easily I could say things to her.
Even about Sadhguru, very casually, she would share different aspects of their life.
Their daily routine.
She would come in the morning sometimes and say, how they spent the entire night just talking to each other.
And I have seen that.
There will be this crowd, but these two will be sitting and talking to each other.
My mother was many things, but she didn't come from an adventurous family, or she didn't come from a background where they travelled all the time and they did new things and that's just not the kind of family that she was from.
And then meeting somebody like my father who was the other extreme always wanted to do something.
And anything that was new that fascinated him, he had to experience it.
And they were together the whole time that she was exposed to all these things.
And I'm always amazed at how easily she took it on.
Even if she was in a waterfall and she was terrified in that moment, because of how devoted she was and how much
Jagi meant to her, she was always okay, if he said no, it's okay, you just come, just follow me and you know, deep in the water or something like that, she would just follow him.
At that time, I was made like this.
If I see a hill or a mountain, I must climb.
If I see a river or water, I must jump.
So I was riding because I did, from Karwar to Kanyakumari, about eleven times on my motorcycle.
One of those trips, Vijay, my wife also was riding with me.
She was new.
She still was figuring out who I am.
So we were riding.
So I came to this Nethra Vate river.
At that place, it's almost a kilometer wide.
Then it was my usual habit.
I parked the motorcycle on the bridge and I said, you be here and I took out my clothes.
In my shorts, I jumped into the river from the bridge.
It's about fifty-five feet.
Jump.
I knew where to jump because I've done that before.
I jumped.
I jumped on this side.
That is, the river is flowing this way, I jumped into the river, into the flow.
Because when it comes and hits the bridge, the columns of the bridge, it's rising almost four to six feet high.
Extra.
So that gives you a buffer. So I jumped right there.
And obviously I went away with the river because the current was strong and it took me twenty-five minutes to get to the banks and come back, climbed up and walked back on the bridge.
Then when I came, she's hollering and people have gathered and she's crying and blowing her head.
I said, what happened?
You said, you drowned. I said, you idiot.
If I jump on this side of the river, of the bridge, inevitably I'll come on the other side.
You… you just have to come to the other side and watch me swimming.
Inshah you're looking here.
Once they come to man, there was no plan.
It was like a nomadic life.
I've got severe weather also.
I used to…
They used to go to Malaysia from there.
Another saying, you know, on beach, you'll see the temple is the Shiva temple.
They used to just try and they will tell, will come the day after tomorrow.
Then when the reach will be maybe four or five days afterwards.
Ula's used to go for all the tricks.
So he would go along with them.
He would come after two, three days.
Gudya trek and all that.
I remember him saying that I lost my shots of freedom water.
He came with somebody's shots and he said, oh that got washed away.
So trekking means vijika is a great company.
I can trust her.
More than Sadhguru, I can trust her.
Because in trekking, I never trust him.
I trust and go, sareli trust will disappear, appear and disappear and appear and disappear.
It's a constant process where vijika I can trust, under present.
Once we went to Vaishnadhi, Vaishnadhi you know the temperature.
So we reached Vaishnadhi we were climbing in the night.
We started around nine o'clock, eighteen kilometers of trekking.
So six o'clock we reached Vaishnadhi.
Sadhguru says, okay we are reached.
What is there in temple?
We will go further climb.
There is no path, nothing.
So I looked at vijika.
I come on and we will go.
And we started climbing.
There is struggle climb.
It's a steep climb.
We were crawling.
Then after reaching the height peak, we were sitting.
Sadhguru says, now going back is tough.
So we will take the another route.
Another road he shows, I can see the bottom directly.
I said this way and he started climbing down and me and vijika says, no we can't come.
That way also you can't go.
You have to come down, he said and went off.
Those times vijika is a benediction for me always.
Because she gives so much of courage.
She will be shaking but she will give courage later.
She says, don't worry man, come, come.
We will go.
Vahra rajah, vahra rajah.
Full of, full of heart.
They would, it would sound like that.
They wouldn't, it was not informed.
They just come whenever they feel like coming.
We used to just think about them and they would like to serve some sort of telepathy that was going on between us and Jagi those days.
He would just alone, it's long time since Jagi has come and he would be there in the next day or maybe in the same day.
That was how it was there.
We had a nursing, a steel drum was there.
We used to keep on the house and rice and some tar and something.
She used to feel that the syndrome with rice.
I don't know if only two of us were, we can't the same.
We can't the same, finish that for a year.
Oh, no, no, no, no, no, don't mind.
She was telling, we'll keep coming, don't bother.
We'll finish it.
Because I remember once Viji came with all her hair shaved, she had shaved and then I think they had gone to Tirupati and some places and they she decided to shave.
That's when she had a big cyst also on her.
I then lost to Kurt with the clinic.
I said, I already went to the sick class.
So, myself and Viji, we went to the testing hospital and it's a minor OT.
Surely they don't tell us to enter only that patient and doctor.
When she entered and she started asking, don't go.
When he, child has him second, that kind of reaction.
Then the doctor held out to me.
Then she was just holding my hand.
He just put an incision in to call that and put a bandage on that.
Then she was okay.
But I know the kind of person she was and sometimes it's hard to believe all the things they did.
How much time they spent on the bikes, slept on the bike, on the sidewalk, the way they travelled and she's not a, she's not like a hardy woman.
She's not somebody who will be like, oh, I'll get through this no matter what.
Purely out of her love and her devotion for my father, she followed him everywhere.
And there was something so nice about the two of them together.
He was constantly teasing her. She was constantly fighting back.
There was something very beautiful about them.
You know, almost, I don't want to say like children because it wasn't naive in that sense, but they were very childlike around each other.
When Jage and BG used to come to my room, they used to stay in our place.
And we both were going to see work.
BG was there at home. She used to clean all the things because we had a small kitchen.
Actually, we won't say it's a kitchen like, there's a hall, there's a half-bought.
Just half-bought, there's one thing, one was peeled like was there.
And it was a small house with one washroom and, you know, one bedroom and one hall.
That's the only thing that we had.
So we used to sleep in the hall and they used to sleep in the bedroom. But then she used to make sure that the washroom is ready for us when we wake up.
So that, you know, because we had to go for work.
So it was never a problem for us, like, you know, like somebody goes.
They would make sure that they are all ready by the time I wake up so that we can use and dress up and go.
So even though she said that she's not on the spiritual path, it's not for her and all that,
I think, constantly right from the beginning she was, I mean, she couldn't help but to make progress on this path.
Generally, people will see Vijika as Sadhguru's wife.
So what people will think is when Sadhguru's wife, she has to be revered. It is not true.
Sadhguru's wife, referring, will happen, may happen after 30 years of building everything.
When you are in the scratch, Sadhguru's wife means more demands.
Fulfilling those demands are very, very, very, very difficult.
Okay, so when they see her humanness, they won't accept that. So Vijji has to be so tuned to that and present herself.
Very, very tough to be a guru's wife.
If you are not aware, you'll have to go through torture.
