What happens during sleep?
Are we aware of our body or mind or is there zero awareness?
No.
I was just looking if there's a practical demo.
Nobody's giving a demo right now.
So what's happening during sleep?
Everything is happening.
Heart is beating, blood is flowing, liver is functioning,
even the dam's plane is working. Just everything is happening.
It's just that you are not conscious of it.
You are not conscious of it even now. Are you?
In sleep you are breathing, everything that is happening right now is also happening in sleep, isn't it?
Only thing is your awareness of the outside is also gone.
Right now you are aware of the outside, largely unaware of the inside.
If I tell you, if I ask you, are you breathing, then you will notice, yes, I am breathing.
If I speak two more sentences, within that you will not know whether you are breathing or not, isn't it?
So even now you are largely unaware. You are only aware of what's forcing itself into you.
Now this sound is forcing itself into you. You have no flaps to close it.
It is going in. This is the pain of such sun, you know.
My voice is anyway entering you. You cannot help it.
But if I keep this room pitch dark and totally silent,
you will see once nothing is forcing itself down your sense organs,
you will see if I keep this thirty minutes like this,
maybe at least thirty percent, forty percent will become drowsy in fall asleep.
Very few people can stay alert in pitch darkness,
simply sitting there without anything happening, very few people.
So when you meditate, this is what you are trying to practice,
that without any outside input you are trying to be aware.
No outside input, just sitting there and just trying to be aware,
so that awareness sinks deeper, doesn't get dissipated like this.
If you have no fear, if you don't generate fear,
being in a dark room makes you very, very aware, one thing.
It heightens your awareness, and the visual input is always a tremendous distraction.
The visual input is taken away, slowly the mind is totally spaced out of the sun.
So a few months of dark room, when people go into the water to leave willingly,
with necessary awareness, with the necessary, the right kind of support from outside.
And if the space is properly energized, it can be hugely beneficial.
Actually, we thought of building this, we just built one and then we kind of,
using it as a store now.
We built some cubicles in the ashram, which are pitch-dock, total underground, totally dark.
Initially we decided to put some people in sadhana there and...
but there is a whole, very alert society outside.
Alert about what somebody else is doing, not alert about who they are and what they are.
So certain reactions started coming, people are being locked up underground,
they don't know what they're doing, buried inside, all kinds of rubbish.
So in the interest of Isha Yoga Foundation, we kind of slowed it down.
But we should have those things, those dark cubicles, where people can just sit.
After all you're going in voluntarily, nobody's forcing you in, simply sitting in darkness.
No input for your senses at all, simply sitting, alert.
You will see gradually, it's almost like even if there's no light,
there is light burning within you, you will become like that.
If we don't provide you with the dark room, you can close your eyes where eye patches and sit.
In a quiet place, simply sit.
You dwell, simply sit.
Nothing to do.
Just staying alert, not sleeping off.
Initially, mine will run, rakas go all over the place.
But after some time, you will see it is not really going anywhere, just going around and around,
doing the same nonsense. After a few days, it will tire.
Because it needs input to go on.
If there's no input at all, input is stimuli.
If there is no external stimuli, slowly this mine's circus will come down.
Some people may just settle within two, three days, somebody may take a week, somebody may take two, three weeks.
But within a certain period of time, most people will settle down.
Almost everybody will settle down.
And then you sit, you will see you don't need light anymore, perfectly fine.
It looks like you're lit up from inside.
So your awareness right now is largely externally stimulated awareness.
It is not on by itself.
The moment you fall asleep, boof, because there's no external stimuli, at least sense organs have shut down,
there's no external stimuli. So you don't exist.
Once you're lit up from inside, once your awareness has become in such a way that it does not need external stimuli,
then even if you are fast asleep, you slept like you're dead, but still something in you is always alive.
Even now it's alive, but unless you're aware of it, it doesn't exist for you.
So once you know how to sleep, absolutely not sleeping lightly, sleeping like a log and still you're awake somewhere,
then there is no death for you.
Because both sleep and death are of the body.
Only your body is sleeping.
Rest is still awake, otherwise it wouldn't keep all this going, isn't it?
Yes or no?
If the... if the very source of what this is slept, it could not keep this thing going, isn't it?
Everything is going on normally, fine.
That means everything that needs to be awake is awake.
Only the physical body and the sense organs have gone to sleep.
So this is the limitation of... this is a tragedy of living within the limitations of the senses,
because senses give you a false sense of knowing everything,
but actually it does not know anything.
It just gives you enough perspective for survival process, nothing more.
That is why it doesn't matter what you talk to people,
they'll take it round and round and talk about survival.
People talked about Shiva.
Now what are they singing about Shiva?
Oh Shiva, protect me, save me, give me this, give me that.
We told you he's a destroyer, but it doesn't matter, he's a destroyer, it's all right for us, let him save me.
Because you can only talk about survival, as long as your experience of life is limited to five senses,
you can only talk about survival and nothing else but survival.
It doesn't matter what's given to you, you will only talk about survival.
Round and round, you'll come back to the same thing, isn't it?
All instruments of liberation, haven't they been compromised in instruments of survival?
Haven't they been?
Temple, prayer, whatever else, everything has become only about survival, isn't it?
These are all instruments for liberation, but they've all been compromised in instruments of survival.
Because right now experience of life is limited to sense perception, that's how only way it can be.
