Namaskaram Sadhguru, you said if you touch the spinal thread, if you focus your attention on the sushum nanaadi, it will become alive and glo.
Can you elaborate on this?
This could be understood and misunderstood in many different ways.
There are many of you who are here, who are almost all these meditators around the world.
Whatever is happening with them, in terms of energy, first of all you need to make a distinction between talking spirituality and actually making something happen with your life process.
There is a psychological process, there is an existential process.
I can open the Bhagavad Gita or the Bible or some other book and read it to you and explain meanings to you, tell stories to you, which can set off a whole range of psychological process.
If you can call it that, at the most it is preparatory in nature.
By itself, there is nothing spiritual about listening to you, discourse or a book or reading a book or writing a book or anything.
It is purely a psychological process.
You have not set off any spiritual process because spirituality is purely existential.
Psychological process is what you do in your head.
You can do whatever you want in your head and it need not have anything to do with reality.
You can sit here and think whatever you want.
It need not have anything to do with the existing reality as such.
Spiritual process is purely existential, what you think, your belief systems, your ideologies, your philosophies, your opinions have no place on the spiritual path.
So we used Asa Yoga as an effective tool to level people's mind.
It rolls you down, Pradiva.
And in that moment of little bit of openness in the psychological process, we did touch your spine.
So whatever is happening around us in the form of programs, in the form of whatever else is not because of a teaching, please see this.
What we are teaching and what is happening to people actually is very contradictory.
We are talking about yoga.
We are talking about peace, inclusion.
All we are talking about is Shunya M. Tinesh.
And what's happening is a scream, very contradictory because the talk, the Isha Yoga program and its content is only a device to level out the resistance that is there in the psychological process to make you feel like a fool.
So that you don't attach yourself to your ideas and values and whatever nonsense you believe in.
The moment you do not identify yourself with that, there is an opening.
The moment that openness happens, your spinal thread will not be spared.
I have no hope about that.
It will not be spared.
You'll immediately be touched.
Whether you let it glow or you resist and create more heat than light is up to you.
If you want, if you know electrical devices, the more resistance there is in a wire through which electricity is passing, more heat is generated, less light, less resistance than less heat and more light.
That's up to you.
That's in your hands.
It's been touched.
The power is on.
If you resist, you create more heat and less light.
If you don't resist, you will create a lot of light and very little heat.
So if you want to cultivate this further, that your glow is not just for your transformation, you want it so that we can get rid of the light bulbs and save and power and do something ecologically good also.
If you want to go that far, then yes, you have to pay a lot of attention to it, a lot of attention.
If you want to become an alternative source of energy on this planet, you have to pay a lot of attention to it.
A lot means lot, but you cannot pay a lot of attention, lot of attention to anything because you can only pay what you have.
But in that also you're saving, that's not okay.
Everything that you have, you pay, that's still not enough because that's not all what you have.
There is more, but that's still redundant, it's not it.
It is still in a unmanifestate.
It is still in a state where it is not, you don't have access to it.
I'm just talking even about your mental attention.
All of your mental attention is not there right now, please see.
At different times of your life in the day, at different times of the day, you are at different levels of attention, isn't it?
If you're doing your work, you're in one level of attention.
If you're doing in meditation, you are in different level of attention, you're eating something that you like very much, you're in a different level of attention.
You're watching a video of something that you like, you're in a different level of attention.
No, you're in a different level of attention.
So your levels of attention, you yourself know it's different and whatever the peak attention that you have had in your life at any time, whatever that was, that is still not all of it.
That is just a small part of it.
You are capable of much more attention, much, much more.
Suppose I put you in a place, right now suppose I leave you in the middle of Vellangiri, mountains, where it's pitch dark.
Without a torch or anything, if you hear while there are mules and anything and you can't see anything, now you are in a different level of attention.
If it's question of life and death, now you will become attentive in a completely different way.
A few years ago, when we were a small group of people here, I took them on a trek, on a railway track between Subramanya and Mangalam, where this 36-kilometer stretch has over 300 ditches and over a hundred tunnels.
Practically you're either on a bridge or in a tunnel most of the time.
And it's wonderful, absolutely wonderful mountain.
Some of the tunnels are over a kilometer long.
If you go into it in the night, even in the day it is pitch dark.
If you go into it, it's absolutely dark, means dark.
You can't see you here like this.
After some time you don't know whether your eyes are open or closed.
It's that dark, absolutely dark.
Many of you have never been in a place like that because wherever you are, there is some light, you know.
Even the star light, something is giving you some sense of vision, absolutely no vision.
Pitch black in front of you.
If you look like this, you don't know whether your hand is there or not.
Really after some time you start wondering whether your eyes are closed or open because it doesn't make any difference.
Even the slightest difference is not there.
So I've made the walk through these tunnels without any torches or anything.
On the railway track it is, you know, you don't know there could be a ditch, there could be opening, there could be anything and the bats are flying all over.
They don't see anything either but they are damn sure of where they're going, you know.
They're just flying really close to you all over the place.
Initially people were so terrified but after some time slowly they started walking and enjoying the whole experience.
If you are in a place like that, your attention becomes really heightened.
If you can keep your attention like this every moment of your life, then you will glow.
Really glow.
Why am I always constantly, especially with the Brahmachari's hand, constantly pushing them to notice little little things in the ashram is because not just about cleanliness, not just about aesthetics of the place, just to be attentive, to be absolutely attentive to every little thing, if a pebble has turned over you must notice it.
Yesterday the pebble was like this, today if it's like this you must notice it.
It is not the question of the pebble, how the pebble is.
It is just that you're attentive.
If you bring this attention to a peak, then whatever your spinal thread that has been touched, it will really glow.
It's been touched.
No question about that.
You have to make it glow, you have to pay attention.
If you learn to have a heightened sense of attention, then we can teach you methods as to what you must attend to and what you should not within you.
Right now just we are still working on people to get them to a certain level of attention.
If you become very attentive, we can look at how to make use of that attentiveness.
It is…
Only when you truly pay attention to your life, first of all, you understand how limited and how baseless life is.
That's the first step towards spirituality happens only because you paid attention to your life and you saw, you don't know where it begins, you don't know where it ends, you're going about as if whatever you're doing is a be all and end all of life.
The moment you pay a little attention, you understand, it's not it.
So the very first step of even thinking spiritual came to you only because of a certain level of attention.
If you pay much more attention to everything, above all if you heightened your ability to be attentive, that could be used in miraculous ways, miraculous ways.
You could really create an alternative source of energy.
