Now turning everything your way, whatever your way is.
If you want to turn everybody in everything your way, but we don't want to come your
way, nor does your wife, nor will your children, nobody wants to come your way, I want you
to understand that.
Why do you want to turn everybody your way?
You want to make everybody like you?
Yes that's what you are ultimately aiming.
Please see if there was one more person like you in your house, you could not live there.
Fortunately there is only one.
Could you bear with another person like yourself in your house?
No.
So you know it's quite a terrible person.
One more person means the world is finished.
It's fine, you are the way you are, it's okay, but please don't try to turn everybody
your way.
You will never be successful anyway, but even the attempt will ruin your life.
Don't try to turn everybody your way.
Please try to understand what is your wife's way, why she is the way she is.
Is she seeking to damage herself?
No, she is also seeking well-being, isn't it?
She is seeking in a different way.
Please walk her way for a few days and see.
You don't know, maybe it is a better way than your way.
I am not saying her way is better, but please explore and see.
See, it is a better way, but if her way is a stupid way, then you can show her after
walking with her in her way for some time, you can show the loopholes in her way and tell
her, see, my way is better.
But if you say everybody should come your way, please know this, nobody will come your
way.
Even you will not be on your way, because your way is towards your well-being, isn't it
true?
But your well-being will never come.
If you insist, everybody should come your way.
All these people that you are trying to get into your way, these people will sabotage your
life so badly.
They won't let you live in this world.
Yes or no?
Yes?
If you are trying to enforce your way upon everybody around you, these people will wait
for a moment and sabotage your life so badly that neither your way nor their way will happen,
only disaster will happen.
So please don't insist on your way.
You want to be well and happy, isn't it?
Your wife also wants the same thing.
So you are on the both of you are on the same journey, but you want to go by bus, you want
to go by taxi.
Yes?
You want to go hopping, she wants to go crawling.
It's up to you.
But both of you want to go to the same place, isn't it?
You want to live joyously, please, sorry, isn't it so?
Then what is your problem?
You also go by taxi.
You want to get there, isn't it?
Which vehicle you get there, what's your problem?
So why is your way so important?
You see right now for the given conditions, for the situations in which we are living,
which is the most conducive way to get there, that's all you can see, isn't it?
Somebody else is going some other way, there, you know they are going by a spacecraft, it
doesn't matter whether that situation is available to you or not, you do not know.
Right now with what is available, how to get where you want, that is the important thing
isn't it?
If you insist your way, you will not have your way.
People will destroy your life.
Your dear wife can become your enemy and completely destroy your wife.
Please understand this, don't take your closest friends and relatives for granted.
If you insist your way is the best way, your dearest wife will become poisoned in your
life.
Yes sir, no.
Are you not capable?
I'm joking.
Yes sir, are you not capable?
If somebody around you goes on insisting, my way is the way, are you not capable of becoming
poisoned in their lives?
You are, isn't it?
Please don't do that to yourself.
