There may be a complexity in the causes which causes a certain effect, definitely.
But even this complex amalgamation of causes, there is a cause which is connected to you
also.
Otherwise, the effect will not happen.
Like for example, you know, this is just about probably eight or nine years ago, this
situation happened.
An explorer went to a certain part of Central Africa, where there was just a small bowl
of a valley.
There is a tribe with about 168 people.
They have been there for centuries, and this particular tribe, because of certain traditions
and other things, they never came out of that valley.
They just lived in this bowl, and nobody entered because they feared it as something strange
or whatever.
They lived there all by themselves for many, many, many centuries.
Nobody knows how long.
Not any contact with the external world, not even with the rest of the African continent,
completely by themselves in a little valley.
They never ventured out, not did anybody going for many centuries.
Just nine years ago or something, somebody happened to go there, and 168 people are there
alive.
That means, you know, children have been born and they have died and things have happened.
But in this tribe, these people did not know that a child is born because of man-moment
relationship.
They did not know this.
In their simple tribal mind, they do something today, nine, ten months later, something else
happens, they are not able to connect the two.
It is so far away, they are not able to calculate to that extent.
So they just did not know that actually children are born because of this man-moment relationship.
And you believe it, that's how short-sighted human vision can become.
So right now, with whatever perception and vision that you have, you can only see that
much.
So it looks all like that.
If you look deeper into it, you will say, your way of functioning within yourself will
create so many things in the universe.
It's not the universe which is making you.
It is you who is making the universe in many ways, in many ways.
Always in this culture they have gone about saying, this is a many cosmos by itself and
all these things you heard.
This is not just being said as symbolism, this is a reality.
If you turn inward, this is a cosmos by itself.
So this cosmos is functioning in another direction, doing all kinds of things.
If this one becomes conscious, suddenly it will start creating the way it wants and life
will shift from one level to another.
