So, could I become the councilman or could I become the president or could I become something
else? See whether it's the presidency or the councilman or the policeman or the postman?
These are all different activities which are necessary to conduct our situation, human situation,
isn't it? Necessary, isn't it? So, especially if a person is in some way spiritually inclined
that he's brought some awareness into him, some sense into him.
It is, isn't it very good that situations, important situations in the world are conducted
by people who are more aware than compulsive? Hmm?
Today, America would be different if there was a more aware leadership. Isn't it so?
So, should we? Yes, if we have the capability, if we have the wherewithal to fulfill that
kind of a thing, yes, why not? Actually, about three and a half, four years ago,
some very important people in India came and attended the programs. We have what's called
as a Holness program, eight-day residential program in the ashram.
It's the same program with more aspects to it because it's residential. People come and live there for eight days.
There's no substitute for that. Okay, it's very different.
They came and they said, this is really wonderful. We never knew something like this exists.
But what about the country? So much mess, what to do with it?
So, I asked them, what are you willing to do?
People always ask big questions and they go away.
As far as I am concerned, before I take a step, I'll think a million times
because once I take a step, there's no looking back for me. I never kept the exit for myself.
Before I enter, I think many times. But once I enter, I have never kept an emergency exit also for me.
I just have to go through it all the way. There is no other way.
So, before I enter, before I step in, I have hesitation.
So, if you want to take up the nation, what are you willing to do? So, this and that happened many things.
Then they suggested. With their medicines, you know, they said we will make a short list of
2,000 important people in the country who can make a difference for the nation.
These people can be political leaders, business leaders, officials, bureaucrats, people in so many capacities in the country,
who can make a difference for the country. If these 2,000 people are more aware, they are more responsible,
and they have coming from their humanity rather than some other kind of identity.
Definitely, it would make a huge impact on the country as a whole.
So, they said we will work on this. They have been working on this.
They have not been hugely successful, but they have been successful reasonably.
A lot of bureaucrats in that administrative level have been attending the program, and it is making a lot of difference.
For example, you saw the rural rejuvenation thing today?
You must come and see what a moment it is. You did not see the next one, the recent one I went there.
I just went to the village and 60,000 people came.
We had a volleyball tournament for the villages. See, this is difficult for you to understand who would be raised in this kind of thing.
An Indian villager would have never played a game in his life. Never.
Especially the woman. Even his children, they have not played a game.
And now we set up ladies and gents teams.
Over 300 teams from that particular area played a tournament for over a month, and they came to the finals after playing 23 games.
So see in the excitement. You won't believe hundreds of boulecarts that people came from all over.
60,000 people. Never before such a spectacle has happened.
People just coming and wanting to watch the game, and in the evening we had a meeting.
Rural people sitting and listening to your talk for two and a half hours in a very disciplined way.
Nothing is offered. No food, no transportation, nothing is offered.
They have just made their own arrangements and come, which is unthinkable.
Usually political rallies means large numbers come, but hundreds of trucks are sent to pick up people.
Food is provided. Some other incentives have given.
Otherwise people won't turn up. Without an incentive, they came and sat there, listened to a talk.
And this is not some kind of talking about God or something.
This is a very provocative talk. They sit there for two and a half hours and disperse in a disciplined way.
The police are just flabbergasted. They sit, how is this possible?
We did not push them, pull them, nothing. Everything is happening systematically here.
How is this possible?
This many village rural people coming without pushing, pulling, without doing this, that situation like that cannot be conducted.
But our volunteers have done such a fantastic job there.
60,000 people came. Like they are a disciplined army, they came, sat there, heard the talk for two and a half hours, meditated for 15 minutes.
And then they left.
So now this is happening. On the administrative level, there are senior, you know, this is called as IAS,
Indian Administrative Service. I don't know, you must have something similar here.
These people naturally land up on a certain level of bureaucracy.
They have to go through a very tough selection scheme. Once they go through that, they will end up at a certain thing.
They are always leaders in the bureaucracy.
So almost 30% of the bureaucracy has gone through the program, which has made the project to go so easily.
Otherwise, these are the key people, not the government.
See, the political power is somewhere else.
And these are the people, on every day you have to meet them and facilitate things.
Simply because 30% of them have gone through the program, this whole project is, you know, going in a well-oiled way.
If these people did not cooperate, bureaucracy is generally known to be so corrupt.
If they don't cooperate, if they somehow do this or that, you cannot conduct the thing.
So it is happening, but still not enough. For the volume of problem that exists in the world, what's happening is not sufficient.
A lot more people have to dedicate themselves to raising human consciousness.
That's the most important thing that needs to happen in the world.
See, we are always thinking of economic solutions, military solutions, social things.
But you need to understand, if human beings as individuals don't raise beyond their limitations, social situations cannot change.
It doesn't matter what your intentions are, isn't it?
Whatever you try to do, it is a people, isn't it? What kind of people who are involved in it?
Isha has been a 100% volunteer organization till now.
There are over quarter million volunteers. There are over 400 to 450 full-time volunteers.
Now, plus another 600 have joined, about 1000 full-time volunteers.
None of them have paid anything. They are all doing the work because they wanted to happen.
All this, whatever this volunteer is coming doing, it's all theirs. Nobody is paid even expenses, generally.
This is not to torture them. This is to make them understand, if something important has to happen,
people should be willing to keep a little bit of their comfort aside and wanting to do it. Otherwise, it won't happen.
So, once you're seeking subjective solutions, it needs dedication. If you want a real solution, it has to be a subjective solution.
There is no other way.
Objective solutions will fix things temporarily and it keeps collapsing.
If you really want a change to happen, human beings should change, isn't it?
We call this the silent revolution of self-realization.
Whenever you say a revolution, the word revolution, what do you think?
Killing, killing, burning, you know, gallows, hanging people, burning this and that, this is revolution.
Revolution means always people have thought to change somebody.
See, wanting to change somebody is not a revolution. It's age-old problem, isn't it?
Mother-in-law wants to change the daughter-in-law, daughter-in-law wants to change the mother-in-law.
Is it a new problem? It's an ancient problem, isn't it?
What is revolutionary about it?
You wanting somebody else to change, there is nothing revolutionary about it.
The true revolution is when I am willing to change.
Once I am willing to change, everything around me will change naturally.
