How many people have reached enlightenment through these processes that you offer?
So he wants an assurance. Does this really work?
Many, many, many. But at the same time, realization is one thing.
Understanding the mechanics of what life is is another thing.
That needs learning. That's like study. That's like understanding this one, this box or this box.
We have to understand. Realizing my nature is a different dimension.
Learning to fix this one is different, isn't it? Can a God tell them about the fix this tape recorder?
He cannot fix it, isn't it? A local guy who has been trained for six months to do this job.
He can just fix it. So this is a different area altogether.
So similarly, the body is a different area altogether.
Realization, spiritual dimension of realization is different. Fixing the body is different.
But once somebody is fully realized, naturally, there's nothing to hold on to the body because there's nothing to stay in the body. There's no stuff to stay.
So he has to learn tricks to keep the body. Learning those tricks will take time because that is a learning process.
Realization is instantaneous. Learning is not instantaneous. One has to learn, isn't it?
Because of this, we've picked down many people on the last step because we want their physical bodies to run their course.
Otherwise I would have people popping around me every day. Handling these bodies will become a big problem.
I don't want to have those bodies on my hand in today's society.
This is like, you know what's just thinking the latter game?
The snake and the latter game, if you put through the dice, six means you hit the ladder, and zoom you went up.
Then you put two, you hit the snake, zoom you came down. This process goes on and on. Some people never make it.
It just goes on and on and on.
But if you manage to reach to the last line, after that there are no snakes anymore.
All you have to do is one, one, one, one, one. It's just a question of time.
But there's no question of falling down.
We have pushed lots of people to that stage. There's no question of them falling down.
But they're not enlightened. They can be asked if it is anybody, but they can't fall down.
Because now all they have to do is just keep throwing the dice.
One, one is not going to come because of your skill.
It comes once in a way. You just wait. One, one, one, one, one, one.
When you put the last one, it's done. But the important thing is no more snakes to swallow you down.
No more snakes to tempt you with the apple.
This is just like that. If you just drop this one calculation, what can I get?
After that no more snakes, it is just a question of time. You'll get that.
And everything in your life. What can I get is dropped means you will become really boundless and absolutely combustion into your life. There is no other way.
You just have to drop this one simple calculation because that is the key to your whole mind and your mental process.
That is the key to all the activity that's happening in the mind.
You just fill the plug. It's all.
So, we have many like that. We don't name them. You don't go looking for them.
There may be most odd places. There are not the people you think there may be, most probably.
But there are many people who are in that kind of place, who are in a certain way.
So, if we allow people to go beyond a certain band, they will leave the body of, they cannot, you know, maintain the normal course of what they're doing. So, we always peg them down on the last step so that they enjoy a certain blissfulness.
They have certain balance and they become useful. They are like castrated bulls.
I'm using a very negative example. I always use negative examples so that your imagination doesn't go wild.
So that you can tie them to the cart and make them work and all this so that they can be useful to the world.
Because anyway, the physical body is intact.
Realization has come within. I feel we must put it to use. The world was all in great bliss. This was not necessary. You would just pop them.
But world is not like that. World is in huge misery. When it's like this, I feel we must harness it.
Even if it means a certain limitation, because anyway, his realization is assured.
He's reached a point where there's no going back. There's no falling back anymore. So, let himself for some time, isn't it?
You don't like it? I think it's okay. A lot of people wouldn't approve this.
But I think it's all right because it's very essential in the world.
The world was doing great. This wouldn't be necessary. The world is not doing great.
Human beings are not doing great. They're going through an enormous nonsense.
If we create more and more people like this, then definitely it'll be a better place.
So, as these methods worked hugely, wonderfully.
Now, how many people got there here? Many, but we don't allow them to go there because their new will create a lot of bodies.
The way our people go, because it's a very short span. Without any sadhana, they're jumping like this, they're energies.
Why people are jumping? I want you to understand.
Something within you has overtaken your body.
The body is growing at a certain pace. Body is in a certain level of evolution.
But the energy is evolved much more. So, the body cannot hold. It's trying to jump out.
That's all that's happening.
If the body also, if you worked sufficiently to create a body also, which is suitable for this kind of energy, then you would simply sit.
No matter how intense this gets. But the necessary body is not there. That means you have mutated, you did not evolve.
Evolution would take a long time. We're doing mutation. That's why it's so much jumping around.
People have advanced too fast. So, we have to pick them down. However, they'll blow.
When we start the process itself, we pick you down. Not later.
Or suppose you forget, there's no such thing. There is no such thing.
Nobody will leave accidently. It cannot happen.
With which it happened because we allowed it. Because the nature of the consecration was such we allowed that aspect.
Otherwise, we couldn't do that kind of work.
So, we also were doing certain things which involved that kind of energy and involvement.
But when we do certain things, we are making sure that people involved have an necessary discipline, an enormous discipline, an absolute, absolute obedience.
This moment they're doing something, if it is going to a certain point, you say no, each no. No question about why, how is that?
Only then you can take the risk. There are people, there are wonderful people like that. We are doing certain things now.
We are doing certain things now.
