See, right now, suppose I plant a mango seed.
Can I keep my options open and expect maybe coconuts will fall out of this tree, maybe
apples will fall out of the tree, maybe cherries will come out of this tree.
All possibilities are open, isn't it?
Yes?
Oh, where do you come from?
From Wonderland or Harry Potter or something?
If you plant a mango seed, only mangoes will come.
That much is determined, isn't it?
But how many mangoes will be?
How many mangoes will we see on this tree?
Or will we ever see mangoes at all as subject to various things, isn't it?
Because all those things are in our hands, whether this tree will bear mangoes, if it
bears how many, to what extent, how long, all these things are in our hands.
But whether this will produce mangoes or coconuts, that is not in your hands.
That also can be taken into your hands if you dig deep enough into life.
But if you simply live your normal life, you can take charge of how many mangoes, but you
can't take charge of mangoes or something else.
If you want to take charge of the other dimension, then you have to dig deep enough into life.
Right now you are not digging that deep.
You're just saying how to produce more mangoes.
Right now this program is focused on how to produce more mangoes.
We are not talking about, can we produce some other fruit on this mango tree?
No.
We are not looking at the direction at all here.
But is there a way to do that?
Yes.
If you dig deep enough, that is also a possibility.
So is anything predetermined?
No.
Whatever is determined has been determined by you unconsciously.
Nobody else is predetermining anything for you.
You unconsciously write your own software through the karmic process.
Accordingly your life functions.
Whichever way you wrote your software, that is the way you think, that's the way you
feel, that's the way you act, that's what you invite in your life.
So one thing that we are trying to change now is, depending upon what kind of karma you
create and generate within you, it is that kind of fragrance that you throw out.
Depending upon what kind of fragrance you throw out into the world, that is the kind
of things you invite for your life.
Some people seem to be constantly meeting pleasant things.
Some people seem to be meeting constantly unpleasant things in their life.
Do you see this happening?
Or for yourself at certain phases in your life, somehow it is like one after another,
one after another it's coming.
Sometimes one after another beautiful things are coming.
So this is simply, it depends today what you have in your garbage bin.
Today you have rotten fish, certain things come.
Tomorrow you have flowers, certain other things come.
So it all depends what kind of stuff you are throwing out.
So right now we are focusing on that aspect of life to bring a certain sense of pleasantness.
Which cannot be disturbed from outside.
And to exude a certain kind of pleasantness that naturally it will attract pleasant things
in the world towards you.
Always it doesn't matter what we do with the world, there will be pleasant and there
will be unpleasant in the world.
What you are going to meet on a daily basis, it watch makes a difference for you, isn't
it?
Not all of us meet the same level of pleasantness in the world, nor do all of us meet the same
level of unpleasantness in the world, isn't it?
Yes?
On a daily basis we meet in different grades of how much you get.
This largely depends on what you are throwing out, every moment of your life.
This is not just thought and emotion, this is much deeper than that.
So that is what we are looking at here.
So is it predetermined?
Definitely not.
Determined out of your unconsciousness.
If you make yourself conscious, all those things can be altered.
