Viji wanted to learn dance when she was young. She did not have the facility, not the thing to learn when she was young.
She said, if I have a daughter, I would like to. I said first thing, you're not having a daughter and she's not going to dance.
She said, I'm not saying I will have. I said, if there is ever a daughter, she must become a dancer.
I said, okay, any number of things they can become.
Let her be a dancer if it is so. An imaginary daughter. Not a real one.
Those days it was 13 days program. She always used to sit at the back of the class.
And she was carrying, she was 7 months pregnant. The last day program was, we went to Bhavani Sahakta.
And when we got down from the bus and we were just walking into the park, the damn park, he is a guru.
He really made her to walk inside the dam. Sometimes he will walk with her.
Sometimes he will just make somebody else so that she walks comfortably and somebody is around her.
I used to go and fight with Viji. You know Viji, you should tell him. I cannot.
While you are going, no, I cannot. He knows that, but I will do it for him.
And then I said that, she will see. So it was like, we used to say, when Balaihapur, the baby sugar function like that, when we returned back in the evening, we did it for her. Which is surprisingly.
She was really overwhelmed and she was literally crying. All of us were emotionally bonded people.
We were all literally crying and that moment was also still just stretching in mind.
She used to be very touched when she said when she was carrying Ravi.
When she vomited Sadhguru came and just took it in his hand.
And all these are small things, but it made her life so full.
And she felt sadhguru's everything for her.
The celebration moments was not Pijis and Sadhguru's alone.
It was the old meditators who were around as if child is born into a family of us.
I've asked my father once, how come they even decided to have a child?
Because he was very clear about what purpose, you know, he was trying to fulfill in his life.
And he was very clear about where he wanted it to go.
And even to me it seemed a little strange that for how much they travelled and how much work they did on a bike that they decided to have a child. But I think that was something my mother wanted.
She wanted a home and she wanted to live in the home with her child and her husband.
And she did all of those things.
Radhaev is just three months old. Not even 90 days completed.
She was there in the whole program.
And they didn't have any private room for the child or for them.
They were just with us. And there's no special care as 90 days old baby and all.
Sometimes during those classes, sometimes they will not even have food.
People will commit and people will forget.
They will not even ask.
Which he was working. Radhaev was travelling with Sadhguru and he would take care of her.
And that's how Radhaev has grown up in different homes.
And I have seen her, whichever home she would go, I have seen her, she would call the lady of the house Amma and the man of the house Apa. She would refer to them as Amma in Apa and of course, her grew a jaghi for her.
You know at that time, everybody called him Jaghi. My mother called him Jaghi.
All the volunteers called him Jaghi. All the people who had come to the foundation for a time.
They also called him Jaghi. Because that's who he was. Like everybody's friends. So everybody called him Jaghi.
And I think because I just grew up in that house where everybody called him Jaghi. I called him Jaghi.
There is an old photograph of both my mother and father together.
Before my father stopped shaving and he had a mustache and shot hair.
And I'd never seen him like that. My whole life he's had long hair and a long beard.
He used to bug me through this person. So I'd remember asking her, who is this uncle that has his arm around your shoulder like this? And she would not stop laughing.
And she would say go and ask Jaghi, go and ask Jaghi and go. And it used to just bug me now and...
But I've seen her to be a very authentic mother. Yet Sadhguru meant to her what nobody else did in her life.
Not her father, not her father, not her daughter.
I remember one instance when I went volunteering for Ladies BSP. So this is this place called Aligumalay.
So once the Ladies BSP got over, the next day was the men's BSP.
So I asked Sadhguru, would you be travelling to some place and come back again here tomorrow.
He said, no, this BSP starts tomorrow and I will stay here.
So I said, okay and while we were talking, one meditator, he came and he mentioned that...
Vijhi had called to find out if Sadhguru would be coming to the city, city's Thirpur city.
If you would be coming to the city in between the two BSP.
So the moment Sadhguru heard that Vijhi had called and she wanted to know if he would be coming, he drove all the way to Thirupur to make a phone call because there was no phone call facility in that area.
He drove all the way to this meditator's place. He made a call to Vijhi and then he drove all the way back to this place.
I think at least two hours of drive, one way.
If she becomes angry, that is also will be hundred percent. Nobody can go near her.
My wife, which is to say, this moment he is the most wonderful husband, most loving, most fantastic man that you can be with.
Next moment he is like an absolute stranger. You don't know who the hell he is.
And it's not easy to live like that.
Once the program starts, Sadhguru has to promise something to Vijhi.
Because he is going away for thirteen days.
So coming back, we will go there or we will go for a movie.
You come to realization, the night we will go for movie or something.
Suddenly he will change. She will make sure he pays for it.
There are a lot of incidents where how in initial days in my so when the class was going,
Vijhi was a great support to Sadhguru. And she was also working in a bank and she took care of Sadhguru to financially also at one point.
When he was going through the transition in his life.
After that I have seen Sadhguru introduced a meditation in BSP, Samyama, Sadhguru.
Before that, to come up with that meditation, he went into some sadhana, one vika sadhana.
So, hundred percent she was there with him, totally taking her affirm.
He came out of the sadhana and did a hateoga, first hateoga program in Koymutho.
That was a hit like that was a tremendous experience.
So, she has shared like, he is like a child, I have to take her always.
I never at least witnessed any moment where she was not completely involved with whoever was around her.
And I don't just mean, Jaggy or me because we are family and I don't even mean it like that.
She was just like that with everybody around her. Whoever she met in that moment, she was completely with them and she felt for them.
One instrument I want to use, Elio is, we used to play the Seven Stones ball.
Seven Stones will keep inside the ball, you know, the game, you know. Two sides will be there.
One will be headed by Sadhguru, another will be Vijayama.
Which is entire focus would be to get him out, like single-minded focus.
And she would get very, very competitive.
And that time she will come and physically fight with him to, you have gone wrong with it.
Again, you don't keep the Stones right.
That game, it will take one and a first to over, sir, but full of tension, the thing.
She will stand up like this with her hand here and she will tear Sadhguru.
And then this back and forth conversation will happen.
She will be really like, Madrakali.
So once the game was over, I said Vijay, you could knock him down today.
So she said, I knocked him down years ago.
What's the point getting him knocked down again, Madakali?
They'll be fighting to the core.
Immediately, once it is over, everything will disappear.
As if nothing has happened, they will lock her in.
No, later talks, dissecting about that, nothing happens.
So it is over. So it is in the system.
Like they have builded it in the system.
Oh my, that during a class, SSY class we had.
That's when Sadhguru said,
10 years time I leave.
Oh, why she cried and cried and cried and cried.
She held, I was sitting next to her, during the class, we were volunteering.
I was sitting next to her, she just held my hand like this.
She was starting shivering.
Why is she shivering and it turned and looked at her, crying and crying and crying.
So much and the whole night she was crying, it was the evening class, then we all, she became somewhat, she became somewhat and she fainted also that day.
She couldn't take it at all.
Crying means like so much non-stop crying.
She couldn't cry, control her joy.
