You tell me, people have always been telling you, if you do good things, everything will
come to you.
Please look around with your eyes clearly, open in the world.
People who have many things in their life, has it come because of their goodness or has
it come because of their capability?
Please look at it carefully.
Is because of their goodness it's come or because of their capability?
Not true.
Where they have, it is come because of their capability.
Please see, not because of goodness.
Right now you are a very good person.
There is somebody else who is the most evil kind that you could find, the most evil of
all.
Now that man, what do you grow in Arizona?
Do you grow anything at all?
Something to eat, I'm talking.
Oranges, oranges, I know, oranges grow everywhere.
You take an orange seed or that man, that evil man takes an orange seed, prepares the
soil well and plants it and takes good care of it.
What will grow?
Orange tree will come.
Anyway when the fruit comes, it's bound to be bitter.
Yes?
Definitely, isn't it?
And then you are living in a fancy world.
You really believe if evil man plants bitter fruit will come?
You saying like this, I take that for yes?
If an evil man plants, how will the orange taste?
Sweet.
If you plant, same, then what is the point you being good with great difficulty of being
good, isn't it?
Your goodness is not getting you anywhere.
How well you took care of the orange plant?
That's how the oranges will come.
Is that so?
You don't know how to grow an orange plant, you did not put a seed but you are very good
and you pray every day orange, orange, orange.
Will it come?
It's your capability to grow the tree.
How well you take care of it which gives good oranges, not your goodness because your goodness
from where the hell did you get this idea that you are good?
Now you sat here, you looked at Troy, oh he is not okay.
You looked at Meine, oh she is not at all okay.
You looked at Sayyas, he's horrible.
You're bad to all these people, I am a good man.
If there is no comparison with anybody, would you be good?
For you to become good, you have made the whole world bad, isn't it in your mind?
Please look at yourself and see carefully.
Actually nobody in the world is okay except you.
Yes?
Please look at it very carefully, is it true?
Not in the world is really alright except you.
Some American author said, I don't know his, I forget his name, he said, everybody in the
world is queer except you and me but you also seem to be a little queer.
Actually I am the only one who is okay.
Now this is not goodness, this is sickness.
Is there any psychiatrist in a class?
Nobody.
If you know something about this, the first signs of mental illness is you start thinking
nobody is okay.
Do you know that's the first symptom?
The first symptom has established itself.
Isn't it so?
Is it manifesting or not?
Nobody is okay.
You are becoming sick, not good.
Good people won't make it anywhere.
Neither here nor there.
It's not your goodness that carries you through this life.
It is the purity with which you walk through this life which carries you across.
And why a certain impurity has risen within you is because you drew boundaries of what
is mine and what is not mine.
Isn't it?
This is my responsibility.
That is not my responsibility.
Why is it that someone can kill this one, harm this one, rob that one, do something
else to that one?
Why?
Because this is my responsibility.
That is not my responsibility.
Isn't it?
Hmm?
Did you ever think of plan how can I harm this one, this one?
How to really cause harm to this one?
Did you ever think?
Hmm?
No.
You're always thinking how to bring well-being to this one, isn't it?
Yes?
But about this one you did not think like that.
Why?
Because your responsibility is only this much.
That is not yours.
If you are truly walking in this world seeing my responsibility is limitless, do you have
to struggle with your purity or your impurity?
Do you have to?
In one stroke it's gone.
Is it so?
Can you be… if you truly see I'm responsible for everything the way it is, could you be
angry?
Is it possible?
Could you be?
Could you be hateful?
Could you be jealous?
All negativity is gone in one stroke, isn't it?
So, you just have to allow it to sink.
Right now you're still thinking responsibility.
You must become being responsible.
Just being responsible is not burdensome.
Thinking responsibility is madness.
Total madness.
If you simply become responsible, now you're in tune with the way your life energies are.
Always responsible, isn't it?
Yes?
Are they hesitating at any moment to respond to anything?
Are they hesitating at any moment to respond to anything?
Only your life energies?
Only your mind is hesitating, only your mind is resisting.
If you get this into tune, suddenly the way life is, is just the way the creation intended
you to be.
Now you are the way your God wanted you to be, not the way your society has twisted you
out to be.
It's time you became like that, isn't it?
So, there are past impressions which are influencing you constantly and make you do all
kinds of wild reactions to life.
Shall we break them a little bit?
