I would say please keep your opinions to yourself because the world doesn't need your opinions.
World is such a mess because people have strong opinions about everything and everybody around
them, isn't it? What you need to do is to experience people and life the way it is not to form your
opinions about it. Opinion means it's something that you created, isn't it? Yes, isn't it?
You understand what I'm saying? Opinion means it's something that you created. Your opinions are
not really yours actually. It is a kind of social influence that is there upon you, that's a kind
of opinion we're talking about. It's suggested to you in so many ways, it happened one day.
Sankharan Pillai went to a party with his wife and freely flirting around with every woman in the
party. The wife was going nuts, the party over and they stepped out on the street.
Sankharan Pillai looked at his wife and said, you are the most beautiful woman in the world.
She said, what? I said, you are the most beautiful woman in the world. Gee, a little melted. Really?
Yes, you are the most beautiful woman in the world. When you repeat something three times, it becomes
the truth. Really? But why nobody told me this? She wondered, why nobody told me this till now.
Then Sankharan Pillai said, then where the hell did you get that idea?
So your opinions are just picked up from outside, isn't it? If ten people tell you, you're very
beautiful, you'll become very beautiful. If ten people tell you, you're very ugly, you'll become
very ugly. If ten people tell you, you're very good, you become very good. Ten people tell you,
you're very bad, you become very bad. Now, ten people are talking about animal rights.
Animals don't need any rights. If you just behave sensibly, they know how to live their life.
They don't need your bloody help, isn't it? Isn't it so? If you restrain your life to what you should
do, not overdoing it, they know how to make their life. Do they need an activist like you to help
them? No. So right now, what is needed is not animal rights or this or insect rights or bird
rights or whatever. What is needed is human beings come to little more sensible way of existence on
the planet. Yes? Now, you're willing to fight for animals. Somebody's fighting for their survival.
You want to fight for animals. Simply, more and more fighting will happen.
All the activists start out with good intentions. I don't doubt their intentions. They have good
intentions. But all that happens in the end is more chaos because your small little little
army is everywhere, isn't it? So what you need is right now, the moment I say your ability to
respond, you're talking action, action, action. You need the action along for some time because
I want you to understand whatever you do. You don't do anything other than who you are,
whichever way you do. You may deceive other people, but with yourself, you know, what you are is
what you can do, isn't it? Now, don't worry about what you do. Enhance the way you are,
what you do naturally happens. Whatever you truly experience as my responsibility, with that,
does somebody have to tell you how to be? Do you need models, principles, ethics to be with that
which you truly experience as my responsibility? If you see this person is hundred percent my
responsibility, do you have to tell me, don't hurt her, don't harm her, don't do this, don't do
that, is it necessary, I'm asking? It's a natural way of being, isn't it? What's needed will happen
out of you. You don't decide what to do. What is needed according to your intelligence,
according to your capability, what you can do will simply flow out of you when you see I'm responsible,
isn't it?
