What about this higher levels of consciousness we are talking about?
Traditionally, this has been classified as the Samadhi.
There are eight different types of samadhi's.
We will not look at all the other things.
There are all different levels of joyousness, different levels of peace, different levels of attainment.
Some will lead you to see these, that is, you know, what you call as supernatural powers or whatever.
Some will lead you to certain visions.
These are all Samadhi's.
The last level of Samadhi is known as the Nirmikalpa.
Nirmikalpa means that the mind has lost all its formations, are all its modifications. It is lost.
It has become still.
Once you attain to Nirmikalpa, it is like, let's say it's like, you can say it's a point of no return.
You can't get lost anymore.
You have not attained to the highest yet, but it's a point of no return. You can't get lost anymore.
It's a short for you.
Because now there is nothing much to do.
Just wait. Things will happen.
During the Wholeness program, we celebrated Sakhus Birthday.
She traveled overnight and she came to be with Sadhguru on that day.
She even brought...
She willinga made in gold as a gift for Sadhguru.
Because by then, Sadhguru had started talking about his mission of creating the Hanalinga.
Which for me was very touching, because it in a way reflected her consent and her involvement in making this happen for Sadhguru.
So she gave that, she came on that day and she saw us all doing different kind of sadhana, which she did not know.
And I think there was a little bit of a hurt in her that she did not get to learn this sadhanas.
So much of things happened within Kartham.
I would say that's turmoil.
She was undergoing that, not attending the Wholeness.
And then on his birthday...
One of the first-time participants had a very good awakening,
Nirvikalpa Samadhi experience.
Third September should not be remembered as my birthday.
It's the first flower.
Probably first Nirvikalpa in jeans.
All these days, whatever happened at every point,
I've been frustrating you, but this is not it.
This is it.
I have company.
And that's Samadhi, Nirvikalpa Samadhi made many people change.
And she also subsided.
And when leaving, she heard my shoulders and I took her to the car and said, you'll have another occasion to be with Sadhguru like this.
I patted her and then she went in the car.
And next day she called me, let's go for a walk in the forest.
So we both went for the forest and I saw she was still very quiet.
I said, what happened with you? Why you are so quiet?
You must be happy. See, what happened yesterday?
None of us could believe any such thing could happen.
See, one of us achieved such a high state spiritually.
She's saying, yes, he's one of the gems in the crown of Chaghi.
And he has started collecting now gems.
Slowly his crown will be full and I don't know how I'm going to look at it.
She even used to describe, see?
This Nival Kaabhasamadi is a gem, emerald here.
This is on Manikam here.
But I really feel little did she know that she will become the cohener of this crown.
Then we went for a trip, 95.
Okay. Manlu, Karanjay, those areas.
So there wherever we see water, we'll be the first to jump.
And there was a temple pond, very deep and all that.
And I am very scared of water.
Then PG was equally scared of this.
She just plunged into the water, brought a tyre and said, hold on and come.
So these are all thought by Vijika. Don't hesitate.
Whatever you feel, you jump into it. If you feel it is right.
That I have to highlight.
Because she's a very strict teacher also.
She won't allow us to deviate also.
She will be very strict, aren't they?
Any number of people would have shared their experiences, how loving she was, how giving she was, like Sadashwahana, she gave her a bangles.
She never regretted it.
She genuinely wanted to help. I remember she coming and talking about that.
Do you know how he has lost everything? Can somebody help? Can you reach out to people?
Can we help him in any way?
And I've also had opportunity to watch her around Sadhguru.
And one thing that I constantly noticed was, he yielded to her. He relented to her in a way that he wouldn't relent to anybody around him.
And I used to think he's doing it because she was his wife.
But I really gave it a thought later on because the ultimate itself relented to her.
And give her what she wanted.
See, one thing is that when you look at Sadhguru, when you look at his brilliance, and everything that he is, there was an expectation in people's mind about Vijji also.
They never saw her for what she was and what balance she brought to Sadhguru's life for the way that she was.
And I think that God expressed in so many different ways.
She had initial struggles like Sadhguru's started growing weird.
I remember that she coming and telling me, see, and during Holness Program, he started time turban also.
And then she was saying, see, pusam, I married a different man.
Right now, the one guy, I don't know who that guy is who is sitting on the dice out there.
I only know one guy romanced me with roses, taking out candlelight dinners.
And who is this guy? I don't know.
She used to say things like that.
And also I watched Vijji was not a participant in Holness Program.
She would come from time to time and stay for you days and she will go.
And when she comes, they both were like two little kids.
He will immediately go hug her.
Hi, Vijji, how are you? She will also jaggy. I missed you so much.
That whole talk will go on between them.
Then we are all like, okay, let's leave.
Now.
There was a certain period of time which she took for herself to adjust to the idea that her husband is a guru now.
And he means a lot of things to a lot of people.
And he means so much more than the relationship that they were having.
And she also saw the transformation in people's life that were in contact with her husband.
So she finally took the plunge and she started coming and living.
And she actually came and informed me that I am finally settling in the ashram.
She would come in the morning for her sadhana. Sadhguru would also come.
Every day that he was here, every single day, Sadhguru, Vijji, and they will bring Radhe who would be sleeping.
So Sadhguru would carry Radhe with her.
He would bring her to the meditation hall, put her down, put her to sleep in one corner.
He would do his sadhana and Vijji and I would do it together.
Everything, whether it's Suri and Amaskar, Asanas, Kriyas, we will do it together.
So she started getting more and more involved.
And then the consecration process also started.
So that involved her even further, it deeper into it.
So, yes, from a man to a guru, the journey for Vijji was not an easy one.
This is more of Guru Sicha. Guru Sicha is tough always.
More demanding, you know.
You have to lose yourself.
