Why the Lingam?
This Lingam is not a worshiping Lingam.
This is a Deanna Lingam.
What it means is, it is not made for you to go there and ask for this, ask for that.
No poja will be conducted here.
This will be consecrated in a meditative manner.
Ancient times there were Lingams like this.
Right now we don't know any Lingam in the country or anywhere else, which is Deanna Lingam.
Now Lingam is that kind of shape, which can retain the energies for a very, very long time.
I would say this Lingam will last for a minimum of 1000 years.
It will definitely last.
So we put our own energies into the Lingam and make it vibrant.
See, I remember when I did my BSP program, Sakur made a statement.
He said something to the effect that for the next 8 to 9 years, he is for sure there.
He said if we leave any early, then he will have to come back again.
So in Holness program he spoke about it.
He spoke about the purpose of coming back again.
He spoke about his previous lifetime.
Sadhguru Shree Brahma, he spoke about Deanna Linga.
When Deanna Linga, these two people who were involved were chosen.
None of us knew what was the criteria.
Much later we came to know that it was a previous life planning.
And those people were in that spot because that was planned for them.
He got what we see Deanna Linga.
Now he got that form done in wood.
So a thin wood, something like this, a long, like a stick and it had this copper wires.
So we used to very jokingly call it magic wand and he used to experiment on us using that.
Normally, I think it was for days on the sadhana, how we know about it is.
Sadhguru will call and that time there was only one phone.
So he will just call and say, don't disturb us for 3 hours.
Or he will say, for next Friday I am not available now, please don't disturb us.
So it's like we initially didn't understand 3 hours itself.
Then we did not understand how could anybody be doing sadhana for so many days.
And when these people do the consecration process, we are called after that.
And we enter the space.
It was like some other world totally.
For consecrating the Deanna Linga, one thing that was necessary was the people involved in it.
I wanted them in states of certain states of samadhi.
Another way of describing a samadhi is your contact with the body becomes minimal in some other states.
It can be brought down to one point at contact.
Then we say it's a neurocalpa, samadhi, where your point is just one, your contact with the body is just one point at like this thread.
You just hold it at one point, you hold your body at a distance and live for some time.
If you break that, then it's mahasamathi.
It's nice to hold it with a single thread and live because you are almost free from it.
There are few things you still have to eat a little bit, you have to go to the toilet, but in every other way you are free from the bodily process.
It's a good way to live.
So to normally when people are like this, we keep them in certain levels of inactivity and safety.
But for the Analinga process, we wanted people in those states, but still I was teaching them how to be active because I wanted them active.
So this gave her a certain, what to say, a tremendous opportunity for her where she could get herself into a certain capability and a possibility.
The Analinga, the consecration part, only he knows. Okay. The rest is all physical.
Like he is very specific about the Analinga, the Lingam part with the granite density, everything is very specific.
So I went and did the group of Jain brought it here.
Then it's a big celebration like, while coming, people were greeting us with drums, all that.
Then our day, our day is a huge process.
Then once our day came, Sadhguru also came, and the time he was calling him Jackie. He came, he also came.
Then Vijji also was in single office. She also came the same place. She came there.
As soon as he came, he said, does anybody have any coconut or anything like that? Immediately Vijji, she popped up.
She said, Alita, you have this note. Can I take it?
Then she went up and she broke it and did the arty and everything.
Somewhere in August 1996, they moved to Shunya Cottage. And Vijji was like, all of you come.
I just want to show you my house. Sadhguru just planned one small get together and called all of us there.
And the atmosphere, we were all just laughing, talking, enjoying.
And when three or four of us were standing, Vijji just said that house means nothing to Jackie.
He's just only done this for me. And she was very emotional about it.
And one of the Brahmachari's approach, Sadhguru and Sadhguru, Vijika is asking you to sit on a chair.
She's going to do Padapuja for you. And Sadhguru was also in a very relaxed mood.
He's saying, Vijji, what is it? Padapuja and all to me.
And she, the sandals that she spoke was sit jaghi and something was in her voice that he immediately understood an event and sat on that chair.
She first washed his feet, then wiped his feet gently with her pallu, saree pallu.
Then she applied vibhuti. Then that vibhuti she kept on her forehead from his feet.
Then she applied kum kum. That kum kum she took and applied in her hair parting here.
And she gave flower on his feet, that flower she kept in her head, you know, the plaid.
And she prostrated herself in front of him.
I mean, it was just a fabulous moment for us to see Vijji.
That's when I first realized that Vijji has transformed in a big way.
She's up for something else.
She was worshipping him as a god and seeing him as a god at that time.
It was a lesson for us also.
For Vijji, I think this was a big dilemma because he was both the husband and the guru for her.
But somewhere towards the end, she saw him more as a guru also.
Vijji shared with this with me that when they got married, Sadhguru told her that he will leave by the age of 40 to her.
And whether she was still willing to marry him.
And she said, and she was like, yes, yes, whatever the consequences, let's get married.
So we had this conversation even in Rishikesh.
So we went on this Himalayan yatra.
You can see here, Himalayan photos all turned black, like sunburned, she'll be like that.
And sometime during the conversation, Vijji made a comment, I want to leave before you.
Sadhguru went quiet for a moment. He tried continuing the conversation, which once again she said, no jaghi, I want to leave before you.
So he said like, okay, Vijji, we'll see, we'll see about it. No jaghi, you promised me. I want to leave before you.
But that particular day, I remember looking at Vijji and finding her, I mean, she was glowing, she was literally glowing on that day.
And she had in some ways started her spiritual journey, officially, that all put together that she looked very, very happy.
She looked very happy, very subtle and very beautiful.
And that evening, in the Satsangya, all the people who are in the Himalayan truck, collected from Santham, it was about own luck for the Analika, I handed over.
So I said, good.
I remember once I was a kitchen in charge, once after the sardna, I just went to the kitchen to make the preparation for the meals.
And Vijji was already there. And she had a big smile on her face.
Then she said, have you noticed that I've started wearing few new jewelry pieces of Lait? I said, really? What happened?
She's saying, you know, sir, jaghi has been giving me recently few small pieces of jewelry. Look at my nose pain.
Did you notice it?
And I was as puzzled as her because Sadhguru is known to appreciate somebody in so many ways and unusual ways, but if King Jelri was, did not fit into his personality.
But after a few months after her Samadhi, Sadhguru was having a meet with all of us.
And then he mentioned that she was so attached to me, whatever I gave her, she would always keep it on.
So just this process is on, the analinga process is on. So I gifted her lot of metal based items so that she will always bear them and not slip outside her body.
But when the moment came, she knew exactly what to do and she just left us and did what she wanted.
And Sadhguru mentioned that if there is a metal, any piece of metal, any part of the body, the person cannot leave the body.
So he had been playing this guru part all this while gifting her item where as she thought her husband is gifting her, finally getting attached to her.
She even mentioned that finally Jelri is getting attached to me, but he was only doing what was needed.
