Jeeves samadhi means, you do not know how to leave your body.
Now I fast, I just enter a place, close myself and leave the body.
This is jeeves samadhi.
You do not know how to snuff this life out.
You do not know how to get out of this body.
So you use samadhi method, but still there is no struggle in you.
Many people go inside and cement their samadhi from the top.
So tomorrow if you open, there should be no struggle in the body.
Even if a little bit of struggle comes, it just amounts to suicide.
There should be no struggle.
Your breath is going away, but there should be no struggle in that.
Then it is jeeves samadhi.
Billy Gidded, I am going to bet.
You are of this B.R. Hills, you are the most fantastic places in terms of nature.
So you are on this hill, there is a place called Duttasampigay.
That means big samadhi.
So on this hill, Nirmala Nanda came and settled down.
He was in silence for 17 years and he just came out of silence and he was preparing for the siva samadhi.
And Sadhguru was sitting like this in Madhguru's Naam, then this jeevamah and then myself.
And he was giving plant and to everybody and giving sasas.
Vichy was in tears and Vichy listened intensely, very intensely.
And the way she was in that atmosphere, she was more a seeker than all of us who came for the purpose.
She said, yah we met and he wanted to know how he can leave his body and Sadhguru and
Nirmala Nanda were talking to each other.
That's the first time I opened up to a completely different thing and I spoke to him certain details about what is it that stops a person from leaving, what is it that makes a person leave.
I went into certain details and Vichy was there, she was listening to all this and she burst out into tears and she cried and cried and cried.
So I just ignored her and spoke, continued to speak to him.
Then he was also beeping off and on and asking me questions and questions and we went into great detail of many things which usually has never spoken anywhere, kind of things.
I don't remember that specific incident where Sadhguru was talking to him about leaving and my mother being there but I remember him being very much a part of her life even though it's not that he was around all the time, we only went to visit him you know every so often but there's a certain familiarity that I feel when I think about him almost like a family member almost.
We were driving down and Vichy was shedding tears.
I said, what's the problem?
She said, I would also like to leave like that.
I said, okay when I were to go, she said, anytime we were at that time working on the
Analina, she said as soon as the Analina is over I would like to leave.
I was just making jokes about her and she said, asking, what about this, what about this?
I said to Lee one that that's not for you, that was for him, that I spoke not for you.
He said, no I am serious about this, in front of the girl she was seven years of age.
I said, just now only three, four months we have moved into the house.
They're just now relaxed, we'll see later when you want to go.
She said, no, right now my inside and my outside is perfect, I want to leave now.
I know before that she went through a very bad phase within herself.
She said, I know I'm capable of messing it up anytime.
Right now everything is good for me, I want to leave now.
I look good why I cannot disagree with that, when everything is good one should leave, not when everything gets bad.
So I said, okay we do some simple sadhana we'll see.
Now like you were with just one word, she said, you say sambho, let me see.
She just went on sambho sambho, sambho dana is speaking of too much intensity, beyond what I expected.
Then I tried to distract her, I made her travel a little bit and do good with cinema and do this and do that, you know.
Right?
She sit down stand up, every breath she became sambho sambho.
Okay then the next December came, 96th December, because I knew he will leave shortly and we went there.
I think I went a day early, with three, four of us went a day early, others came in a bus the next day.
So it was 25th of December when we all went and met Nirmulananda and he sang two lines for us.
It was a very sweet meeting.
And that was also the day that Sadhguru was leaving, starting the karmayatra.
We were in a rush to finish the Deanna Linga consecration, but things were still not falling into place.
Until we had invested in it, many people, we gathered those 14 people, we needed and put them here for three months, but they wouldn't deal, they had developed new attitudes in this life.
They were acting funny.
So things were not happening, time was running out, so we had to do something drastic.
So we took people to those places which would connect them to their previous lives, so that we could shake them up completely.
That kind of shaking up becomes a…
Luzhan's a person within his… his contact with the body is so doozhan'd that he becomes capable of leaving if he wishes, which manifested in our lives in a certain way.
But at that time it was needed, without that looseness, we could not… they could not be the right material for the consecration process.
It was a drastic step that we took because time was running out.
Karma Yatra was in a very essential part of the consecration because they also have to unwind certain past residues, which was a hindrance to that process what they have to give in.
We went to Sambalpur, I think, is where that tree is, that he went back to visit, and I remember being so scared of the tree for some reason.
It was too much for me, I didn't want to go near it and I didn't want to touch it.
So obviously my experience of any of these things is very different from… I think people who were there for that purpose.
But my mother was there and she was so impacted by that whole situation.
The people there, everybody around me was so impacted by the situation.
Sometimes we used to make the whole debrudra action in my hand and make me close my eyes and tell him what I felt.
And I remember feeling wildly different things based on the debrudra action that he put.
He went just for like eight, nine days from Karma Yatra.
He was gone only for about because Sadhguru said in eight days he drove how many, some ten thousand kilometers and covered some six states.
A few things Viji shared was that it was very intense and she said unbelievable things happened.
She said I could sit for hours and meditate.
But after Karma Yatra in some way I found that a sense of settlement in her.
I don't know, in Hindi they say it, taraav.
It taraav she had in her life and the changes in her behavior.
We knew this process is something very important and it is transforming in nature.
Now certain photographs are there with a mala on her body.
You can see the picture, the beefier before picture and this picture, which will be completely different.
Yeah, I certainly experienced Tamil news energy and I can say I have taken one or two steps towards my growth and certainly it helped me, it helped me to be a little more mature person and I consider myself very lucky to be with these two people and both of them have poured their lives into me.
I only hope that it can be useful to everyone.
Tia is her flowing and she says it never experienced something like this.
Now I understand what I am into and what I am longing for.
After Karma Yatra and when she was going through Sajan sadhana she wanted to feed the brahmacaris.
Evening every power name we go.
See it with so much love she will make the thing.
And she served it to us with her own hands.
Like they will hold the food in one bowl, take the food and serve it directly into our hands.
And that's how we ate.
She served us one hand of Sambar Sadhana and Sadhguru served us in our hands that I was busy about that she made, that's when I really felt something is totally unique and I had the feeling of it goddess actually that time that's what I was trying to tell you earlier also.
And the radiance that I am describing, it was not of this world.
I myself felt how would a person be so radiant and when she was sitting live in front of me,
I was really glowing.
And I got this information that Nirmala Nanda has attained to Samadhi so I went.
I told him I said Sadhguru, Nirmala Nanda has taken Samadhi.
So Vichi was inside the house and I think she heard it and she immediately came out and she looked at Sadhguru and asked, Sadhguru what do you think?
Did he leave his body or did he use some memes?
Because the plan was that in case he is not able to leave his body on his own, he got one Samadhi made where he will sit inside the Samadhi and he asked his disciples to fill the Samadhi with Vibhuti and close the Samadhi.
So that was his plan V.
So Sadhguru closed his eyes for a few minutes and then he opened his eyes and said no, he left his body on his own.
So Sadhguru, Vichi was like, oh okay.
And the spirit with which she came, she went inside.
So I think Nirmala Nanda Samadhi was one instance where it also created a lot of intensity in Vichi to take that step and take it sooner than later.
It was an atmosphere in the ashram, very high velocity of everything, very much into a high page of something huge going to happen.
In the ashram, Sadhguru was sitting in the layers and Vijeya man saw inside, Bharati Karan said, Sadhguru asked all of us to come within this triangle and they did the process of consecration and all the people inside the triangle were jumping, levitating.
Then it subsided and then Sadhguru said, this type of process we are going to do for the consecration of younglinga and those two beings will dissolve their karmas.
And we are, there are the pure energy to give to the youngling.
And Sadhguru said, the process will be successful.
And Vijeya man hurried herself to Shiva Hara, the ultimate before the consecration.
