Suddenly, the last eight, nine months, she became all focused and like that.
So, it's the way she was going, I saw her, she's going so intensely.
And after two, three months, she even started talking confidently that she's going to leave in another six months or eight months, something.
So, before that, we wanted to finish the consecration.
And then, you know, we even visited her parents and they're also, it was gently mentioned.
Then I visited my mother's ceremony where they're on the 18th of January.
So, we went to my store and sort of gently put it across to them also that she may not be around for too long.
My father dismissed it as rubbish.
Others were little taken aback.
Then on 21st, we dropped Radha at school.
And that's when she, she was talking to Radha already that there won't be the end of sometime.
I remember one thing about her saying, I won't be here for your next birthday.
And I, and me thinking, oh, but you'll be there for the next one.
And then her explaining, it wasn't about the birthday, it was that she may not be there for events in the future or something to that effect.
But it was definitely at least two, maybe even three conversations over some amount of time.
So, the girl and she was just talking very matter of fact, she won't be there.
So, they'll give you'll come and do this and do that.
I said, why are you doing this to the girl, just leave her alone.
We don't know whether you'll go or not.
She said, no, no, no, I have to tell her, I will definitely go.
I said, okay.
And we came back 21st evening from UT.
Twenty-third evening is when she left.
On this day on 23rd January, 1997, I think it was around eight in the morning.
And I got a call from Sadhguru.
He called on the intercom and he said, can you come over?
So I went home and he was there and he said, today's Pournami, full moon day and Viji is in a particular sadhana.
So just stay with her and be part of whatever she is doing.
So I said, okay.
So I went inside and Viji was doing something in the kitchen and after some time she said, come, it's time for me to meditate.
And let's go and meditate.
And I think at some point in the morning Sadhguru even served a meal to Sadhguru.
There's a very special place for us in Orissa called Sambalpur.
Sambalpur has a very unique kind of textile.
Silk weaving is of a very unique nature.
They have made a very unique type of saris.
We had bought a sari there for her.
She was thinking she was going to wear it for the Jana Ligarh consecration or the function or whatever.
But suddenly she wore that and came in the morning.
I looked at her and said, what is this?
You're just dressed up like a bride, what's the problem?
And she was sitting on tears for flowing in her eyes and she was like tears of ecstasy.
You know, she's just in a…
I've never seen her look that beautiful.
So Sadhguru had his lunch brunch and then he went off to the teacher's training.
And then she opened a roll top desk and there was a diary.
There was a new year diary because it was just January still.
She picked up that diary and she gave it to me.
She said, henceforth you write Sadhguru's appointments in this diary and you send it to Sadhguru.
So the arrangement between me and Vijji was that every day I would write Sadhguru's appointments and a piece of paper, I will hand it over to Vijji that these are his appointments of the day.
And then she will in turn inform Sadhguru that these are your appointments of the day.
So in that day when she said, henceforth you write all of Sadhguru's appointments in this diary and you send it to him directly, she mentioned this word directly.
So I said, why Vijji?
Why do I need to do that?
It's working very well for me.
But she said, no, no, no.
And when she said this, it came out very, very gently.
She said, no, you do it.
You do it henceforth.
We had just come out of meditation after meditating for an hour.
Then Sadhguru had also told me that she is in a certain meditation process that way then I didn't want to argue.
I got it from her and but in the back of my mind, I am very clear that I will not be using it.
And then we went and we got involved with some work around the house, some cleaning, some cooking, something.
And after the lunch she called, she called me, said, come and join us.
I want to show the photos of Akharma Yatra.
Then she said, okay, I am going towards the house.
I never knew this will be my last conversation with Vijji.
It was normal like any other day.
She was also, I didn't notice anything different about her except that she was so radiant.
And also from the previous full-mode night, which he had taken this up that for three full-mode nights, she wanted to serve the brahmacaris herself.
And then she asked us, so I mean, I would like to prepare for today night for all of you.
Now I said, Bissi Vallapati, prepare Bissi Vallapati.
And she said, then Sashadguru was by side of her and she said, no, teachers are more now and brahmacaris are there.
It will take time.
You can't do the process.
So you prepare something simple.
He suggested a case.
We started preparing, making a preparation for that.
By then it was the afternoon Santhya time.
So she said, Mark, come, let's meditate.
It's afternoon Santhya time.
So we went and I think we meditated for about a couple of hours this time.
And then we went back to Kitchen saying that, okay, now we let's start preparing this sweet because evening she has to serve it.
So we're talking in general, nothing.
And she was sharing.
She said, you know, I went for satsang yesterday.
I took a satsang after many, many years.
I trained her as a teacher, Farisha, you got one time.
But she refused to teach almost eight years or nine years before that.
For nine years she had not thought saying that, that I am not up to what I am teaching.
So suddenly one satsang was there in Karmatore and something happened.
Some teacher could not go with an emergency and the only way was I had to go.
But I had some work in the ashram.
We were struggling with this.
She just came and said, I will go.
I said, what?
She said, no, I will go.
I said, okay.
Her satsang was a blast.
So beautifully, so gracefully, it flowed.
After the satsang, I just went next to her.
She just hold my hands.
She told my hands so tight.
She said, Bhijima, I was like, she told you to be in silence.
Me and Bhai said, you be in silence.
So this was the word, the very low voice.
She was so particular she wanted to see me on the day.
And she bought some sweet, oh, I forgot to tell you that.
She made it herself and she brought that for me.
I am forget that.
So she was also referring to her that how they were surprised about it and how they were saying this, that she was in general, we were talking.
At some point, Sadhguru came back from teachers' training and then Sadhguru and Vichy were talking to each other while I was doing some cleaning up in the kitchen.
And I think after some time she came and she told me that she was also going to the teachers' meet.
A lot of all of us were sitting out, the teachers were sitting and all that.
There was nothing like extraordinary that was happening.
The usual class thing, what we should do, how we should take these things ahead.
Then Sadhguru asked her to sing.
She said, no, no, I don't want to sing.
He said, no, you sing.
So in the daias, he is sitting on top.
He said, part of the rice which is little low, she sat there and she sang the song.
Rade, Rade, Rade, Rade, Rade, Gavinda, Rade, Gavinda, Brindavan, Chanda, Anatana, Dina,
Bandhu, Rade, Gavinda.
The song, she sings beautifully.
And this is her favourite song and that song that she sang that day, that is the last song she sang.
So that day, 4 o'clock till 4 o'clock she was participating in the training program.
Sadhguru sitting in the daias, she was sitting with us.
Then she got up and she said, I'm going for sadhana, she went.
And evening we went for the sadhana practice.
At 6 o'clock to the room, to the shrine where she was there, shuni cottage.
The whole house was mailing of case, still, you know.
You know she came and hugged me once and then went into the shrine.
A few people were sitting along with us, we were just sitting.
Once we sit there in the shrine, nobody ever gets up till I indicate for them that they can go.
It's an unwritten, it's an unsert thing.
I sat with my eyes closed after about six, seven minutes, she got up.
I have my eyes for close but I knew she got up and she walked out of the shrine.
A moment of irritation in my mind.
Of all the people, my wife is getting into now.
A little irritation in my mind for a moment.
Then I ignored it and I sat there for what I was sitting.
And after a few minutes after, let's say, about another five minutes or so, she came back and sat down.
Vijay who was sitting down, there used to be a chair which only Sadhguru used to sit on in the, at a very low level chair.
Vijay, you know, she got up and she sat on that chair.
It was slightly surprising because whatever Sadhguru had done, Vijay had this huge respect, you know, whatever, if there was something as Sadhguru's seat, she would not sit on that seat.
And Vijay was sitting in a small chair, a low chair and when we all chanted after some time I could say, Vijay like this tilted head.
We thought she's in one of a thing and we came out.
And I was sitting, you know, very close to Vijay.
I felt, you know, which is weight on me and you know, to have that, you know, initially you feel that why this weight on you, but more and more I felt it on me.
And that's when I opened my eyes and she was like on me, she had sort of, she was totally leaning on me.
And I tried to put her back onto the chair, but she seemed unconscious.
She seemed unconscious to me.
And I don't know who was next to me that I touched that person and brahmachari and asked for help.
And then by then, Sadhguru had also opened his eyes and he got up and came.
And he looked at her and, you know, I think he was trying to do something to revive her or whatever.
And then he said, she has left.
And she attained Mahasamadi in a saree that Sadhguru had gifted her own.
Mahasubra, three days.
Green color, green and black.
See, this is a simple thing which we never ever had spoken before.
Only now we talk about it because the situation happened.
Whenever anybody comes to the ashram and they want to do some sadhana, if they want to do any intense sadhana, first thing is I put a ring on their kapar ring.
This is like a gift from the guru that you cannot take it off unless he says.
Because if you put a metal ring on the left side of your body, then especially on your ring finger, accidentally you will not leave the body.
But she went into the bathroom because she sat there for meditation.
She suddenly realized this metal is restricting her.
She went to cover all the metal, including her nozzering, Kaman's had dal.
This is the reason why always they used to put it on the left side for the woman.
But today they put it in the room.
So she remothered and Kaman's had dal.
She is 33 years of age in full health.
In the best of her life she is.
And she just left like that.
So this is leaving out of intensity.
So this is what will happen if you go on the path of devotion beyond a certain picture.
Because the devotee has no other intention.
The word devotion itself comes from the word dissolution.
The only intention of a devotee is to dissolve himself into his object of devotion.
So she became like this, you know, those eight, nine months, just shambosh, shambosh, shambosh sitting standing her breath became shambosh, you know.
And then she went to Korn, such an intensity that she just left at that time.
