Now in your mind, sitting the body amounts to so many things.
Body is something that you accumulated.
You just dug up the earth and put it up here in the form of this body.
When it falls back, it just again becomes the earth.
So when somebody has carried this piece of earth for long enough and they want to drop it consciously, they drop it.
Normally it happens within orma sadhana, like you said.
With Viji, it did not come because of sadhana.
It came simply because of sheer intensity of emotion.
I think we were only about forty, forty-five minutes into meditation when this happened.
She was in Samadhi, left the body.
And some of us have started crying, no crying here.
You sit and meditate for fifteen minutes, he said.
All of us sat in the room.
There was no dark process for me, completely stopped.
Yes, I was still so much of an energy.
She was kept, she was sitting and I lifted her head and kept.
I felt her warmth, so alive, I cannot believe she can't come back.
For me, I don't even know what is happening out there.
Because Viji is there.
Because she was there, she was sitting right next to me, chanting, moments ago.
So it was a huge shock for all of us.
Then Sadhguru took care of everything, giving a man a bath and everything.
Then I asked Sadhguru, what about Radhe?
She was in school, I noticed at that time, studying in a hospital.
He said, yes, there was a meritator in Koyabatoor, he said, inform him and ask him to go to
Uti and bring Radhe.
I remember them coming to pick me up, putting a bang in the car.
I must have fallen asleep on the journey, but I remember waking up between two buses.
I don't know why, but for a large part of the journey, I remember being between two buses.
And then when we got to the ashram, Margambiri and one other person, they were there when
I came home and I left my slippers and I remember seeing all these slippers outside.
And I walked into the house and there were so many people sitting there and all crying and all I could see was this, I remember Margambiri said, I think she's lying down under a bed of flowers, so don't disturb it in that sense.
So I remember seeing that and I kind of somewhere understood what had happened and I was okay with it.
My first concern was that my father had tears running down his cheeks and I had never seen him like that.
And Sadhguru had not eaten, you know, since morning I tried to offer him something to at least drink, he wouldn't drink that.
He sat by Viji through the night and when Radha came, that was one moment that I saw
Sadhguru breaking down.
He hugged Radha and he took her inside.
He must have spoken to me, said something, but what I remember clearly from that night is I remember hugging him and I remember holding a lot of people and my clothes getting wet from people crying.
See, when it comes to the experience we had those days, it was very intense.
One could do, today what happens in Samyama or whatever it is, those days during consecration we were taken to the edge.
We had very, very huge experience.
Some I would see, witness many things, some I witnessed, disembodied being, some I witnessed highest state like Nelvika El Pasamadhi and I thought Mahasamadhi is one of the heights, but never thought one leaves there, you know.
So when Viji I saw her in a very meditative state and so warm and so alive, I could feel,
I felt this is beautiful, but I want a back, you know.
So I told Sadhguru, no, enough, we bring a back.
It's something I thought, I like all of us coming out that's all.
But she won't come back, it's something, that loss was very unbearable, you know.
That time, you know, we did notice that there was like a burn mark on her Anahata and Sadhguru, but before that itself, Sadhguru said she has left, she has left through her Anahata and then we saw a mark on her Anahata because she left that way.
And I don't know, I mean the atmosphere was very emotional.
And Sadhguru said, please don't cry, it is not a sad matter, it is a proud moment for every spiritual seeker that she has attained Mahasamadhi at her own, like this.
That whole night we were sitting in the Sadhguru house and he asked me to sing.
Ramarama, chama-Rama, Rama-Rama, Rama-Rama, Rama-Rama, Rama-Rama.
It is not like some death house, definitely it is not so.
When they came, they were more of emotions.
Once we spoke to them, they saw our rasimha, they all settled on.
Hundreds of meditators, perhaps thousands, there were at least couple of thousands or 3,000 people were gathered by them.
So in the morning then we decided that it won't be appropriate to keep the body like this because it's already 12 hours.
So then we started the cremation process.
I couldn't believe seeing Vijay lying on the fire.
I remember to this date, her lying there, we were all crying at that time.
I don't know how to put it, I don't know.
But still he was like, he was in tears.
Sadhguru was still wearing the same clothes, you know, those days he used to wear just a dhodi and an Angavastram.
So then Sadhguru took off his wangavastram.
He covered Viji with his Angavastram.
He came and lit the fire.
He told his rudraks, he was having it too close to him, he burned that.
Full silence.
And then Sadhguru was just sitting there and he just looked at me like this and started vaping.
It must have been a very late at night and I went to sleep and when I woke up in the morning the cremation was not over but it was getting over.
The next day I saw Sadhguru and Rade digging the thing to take Viji's bones.
It was too touching.
And they were collecting from the outer edges, they were collecting some things.
I think that was really when I kind of understood that she was gone.
But I wasn't.
I don't know, it was the next morning when I saw everybody and everything was done.
Then I kind of settled that it was over.
We reached early morning here.
So that time cremation was over.
Where Viji had left the body there, dancing, kept the girl and flower cell thing.
And Sadhguru was sitting next to that, dancing place.
He was just like stony of sitting there.
He was not just flowing a T.S. flowing.
He didn't tell anything.
I just, I had to listen to T.S.
Maybe that dancing as your mother.
She's been like my shadow every moment, not just my wife, she's been everything.
And she's been involved in the spiritual process also.
She's been involved in my work also.
Especially now, she was so deeply involved in everything.
There is no grief in me, because death is not new to me.
In my experience, I have known many, not outside of my own, my own deaths and births when I can clearly remember.
And I can clearly live through them. I have no grief about it.
About feeling lonely, such a thing never happens to me, I have never longed.
She lies with me every moment.
Where is the question of feeling lonely that never happens?
Definitely a beautiful person is gone, you miss her.
Our flower blooms in your house today, tomorrow morning it dries up.
You go and see, the flower is not there, you miss her, doesn't it?
But you don't become, you don't grieve for it.
If you're sensible, you don't grieve for it.
You don't cry for it, nor do you feel lonely, but you miss it.
So that's how it is with Viji and me.
It felt to me like he was definitely missing somebody, but they were in the middle of so much work when it happened, that I don't know, because I think there was no way to stop or restart, they just had to continue with the work that they had already started.
That was a huge part of it.
He had also mentioned that he might leave, and sometimes I wonder if her entire process was more intense, because she thought he might leave.
Sometimes I wonder if maybe she even thought that, you know, if she is able to attain, and this was a possibility for her, then he would have no choice but to stay.
I don't know if it was part of her thinking, but sometimes I wonder that maybe she felt that way that he would have to stay with all the people, and he would have to stay with a very young daughter, and couldn't just leave once the concentration was done.
So, the case that she had made was untouched in the kitchen, but since she had made it, then Sadhguru said, let this be served as Prasadam to everybody.
Then he came out to the corridor and called all of us and told, which he then my sister, now my wife, what many, many gurus and what many people aspire to touch this state, she has done it.
Those of you who knew her, you know that she never knew the in-between.
She is either high or low.
There is no in-between for this person.
She is either at the peak or at the bottom, always intense, whichever way positive or negative with absolute intensity.
That intensity, when it found little awareness, suddenly it became a tool, and the last few months when she consciously started looking for that, everything changed dramatically for her.
This is the… this is the advantage of Bhakti.
And this is also the disadvantage of Bhakti. It has two sides to it.
Bhakti is utter madness.
But this madness is capable of liberating a person too quick.
Right now if you look at yourself among the four realities that you are, your physical body, your thought process, your energy and your emotion, you will see the most intense part of you is still your emotion for most of you.
For ninety-nine percent of you, the most intense part of you is still your emotion.
This is the reason why for ages Bhakti has been the most dominant path because emotion is intense.
Once you walk the emotional path, you should not be concerned what will happen to you in the world in which you live, because anything may happen.
You can go absolutely crazy for periods of time because emotion is madness.
But madness is intensity. Anything that is intensity can become a way.
So that's what happened the last few months. Every step, every breath, it became sambos, sambos, sambos.
It picked up so much intensity that dropping the body just like that became so simple.
It's rare, very rare, such a thing happening.
But at that time somehow everything came together.
For her being in the process of Deanna Linga, remaining in processes where you are no more the body for long periods of time, became a stepping stone towards that.
If she was not exposed to such situations for long periods of time, it wouldn't have happened at that time.
There is no question about that.
