So, when it comes to busy, definitely is truly normal.
We know what kind of energy is he carried.
The fragrance is definitely felt even today in the train.
You can never, you can never banish from that place.
You cannot exercise that fragrance from that place.
It's impossible.
But she cannot come and do anything.
That is not that she anymore.
He would sit from morning till night.
He would sit in the shrine.
Where Rijil left her body.
I didn't see him do anything else.
He didn't meet people.
He met people in the sense the house was open for all of those people to come, pay their respect and leave.
I didn't have the courage to see him.
He was really effective.
We saw him crying so much and we couldn't understand.
And then one day he called all of us and he is saying that energy that she is left through
Anahata, that energy is so unbearable for me, the energy of love, that I am not able to stop crying.
It's not my loss that Riji has gone that I am crying.
And in those days I remember he kind of became tender towards us.
Usually he is a guru.
He can be very hard.
He can be very unailding.
And he can be very firm with us.
But then he explained it is this energy which he is not able to bear.
He's left such powerful vacuum of Anahata over there and he is being in the same room.
It's Riji gone.
When it comes to crucial points she comes to sense.
So that's been the saving grace always.
And it really comes to the crux, she is very very sensible.
Since her Mahasamadi, even though the physical plane was no more, I understand from what he says, said that there were few milestones still were to be crossed till she was finally dissolved.
So he said once she attained Mahasamadi I thought Riji will approach me.
Riji will approach me and I will finish the Dhaneliga configuration with her only.
But she straight fell into the hands of beautiful master who guided and assisted her.
And 20, 21 days after her Mahasamadi she dissolved.
She came out, I think Aradhanavi did 16th day, we did Aradha.
I think that's the day he actually spoke, spoke properly and he spoke how as a guru you know it's a matter of pride.
The way she left her body and she left so effortlessly what a matter of pride it is for a guru.
But she said as a husband she left my home empty.
And Monday he called us, he said that which was Riji is no more.
The being that which was Riji is no more, she is finally dissolved completely.
But the Mahasamadi is always powerful, it's simply going into meditation.
There is something about that place even now, just the way she left.
There seems to be tremendous support if I want to go in certain direction.
It seems like there is a support from her.
You can literally feel her, like her presence is there and it is very susoo-ding.
It's been very sudha and very, very beautiful.
When I went to a certain master's church in his body he would also make sure that the place is very regressed.
Now after my wife's samadhi come there the place is always that place is down into it when she comes here after she left suddenly just take on a different kind.
So then the whole thing has become very feminine.
She is just down into the whole thing in a certain way.
It's very beautiful now that suddenly everybody's, you know, people who are going in tents, sadhana, sadhana, they are going in general work, the monks and other people.
Suddenly after this all their work has changed, they know, the very flavour of their work has changed in a certain way because this kind of energy has come, the feminine I think has become so strong.
And yeah, definitely that boy's sad guru is not there anymore.
Only with Vijay Akkara he used to be like that and we can see him like that.
I feel Vijay used to bring out a certain dimension in him.
He is in as a guru he is one way that he needs to be.
But what he is actually as a person, that aspect which he was able to bring out in him.
And I have seen that you know very effervescent person, a very likable person, very tender moments, the tenderness that he's capable of, emotions that he's capable of, which he will never reveal as a guru.
I saw a lot of that in sadhguru and a lot of that that I don't see in sadhguru now.
Yes, there is a big shift.
But Vijay's Mahasamadi opened up all possibilities.
The whole ashram transformed to another level.
I think a shift happened at that time.
See when we did wholeness program, this very ashram started taking a certain shape.
And you know sadhguru is to speak of many things, many possibilities.
We also experienced many things within us, especially during wholeness program.
So many dimensions sadhguru opened up because at that time sadhguru was also looking for ways to consecrate the Hanalega.
Because at one time he had told me, he said intuitively we do many things.
But I want to make a science out of it.
So when we saw right in front of our eyes, this thing happening, this was like hugely motivating tool. Any number of seekers, not just in the ashram,
I think a big shift happened at that time.
A big shift happened for people to see that what sadhguru has to offer is a very rare possibility.
I actually bow down to her for the seeker that she had transformed herself into.
I really bow down to her and she is real and in inspiration.
Her simplicity, her devotion, her love, I think experiencing that in some way it makes me understand that there is.
There is another way to go about seeking.
And she made it seem almost simple that something that seems so unattainable.
She made it seem very, very simple in the way that she went about it very gracefully and very beautifully.
She thought Radha was more mature than her. So she will tell, she is my mother.
In so many instances, she would remember very clearly, this is my mother's comb, this is my mother's this thing.
This is what my mother told me when she came and saw me last. She will remember every single detail to such depth that it would surprise me.
Yet never once she asked me where is her mother, when will she come back, where has she gone? Never one she questioned me that.
So when you met her mother passed away and I kept her in three or four days and I am taking her back to school.
She was just fine and I thought maybe she didn't understand what happened.
Then I was driving around and I told her do you know that you will never see her again.
It says that the heart will tell people come back, why don't you come back?
Then I said, my heart is okay with you. No more, she has spoken to me, it's okay with me.
And I said it's okay, my name.
It's a way to grow up and then you leave. I live, I live, you know.
Okay, I have somebody here in beautiful of my hands.
Why are I going to tell you this?
After Vijay Samadhi, those sixteen days, in those sixteen days, Sadhguru was getting ready for the thing.
He was doing something for his Samadhi. Next to Vijay's thing, just behind that.
I was so shocked.
That's why we didn't want to tell you. It was getting ready then.
I was shocked.
I think because she spoke to me before she left and because he had spoken to other people about leaving, but he had never spoken to me about it. Not quite in the way that she had.
I think even today, I hold on to that a little bit that he will tell me before he goes.
That may just be my expectation, he may not be aware of it.
But somehow, I think because of how beautifully she handled it, I had to know, you know, that was something that was going to happen. I had to know.
But even today, I definitely feel that way. I hope that he will speak to me about it before he leads.
For months since we left, one thing very incredible about that situation is, she didn't live the life of an enlightened being.
She lived a life of constant turmoil, struggle, searching, seeking, not knowing where to search, not knowing where to look, most of the time. She didn't know where to look.
You can see the dramatic change, the very way she looked changed in the last few months.
The very appearance changed. Once she was onto it, there was no stopping.
In the process of this Deanna-Lingham consecration, there were moments where I had to just bow down to her. She was like that, you know.
There is really nothing more graceful in life that a person can just leave the body and walk away.
And all the people who went everything to her without turning back and looking, just walking away.
I think all of us who witnessed this are truly fortunate. Rarely a person gets to see that kind of grace.
Then when Sadhguru announced about Linga Bhairavi and when it happened to see that Vijis Mahasamadhi Day and the Devi Temple Consegregation, we learned the same day.
This hard energy, it is she. She is only here as Devi for us.
You know, in front of Devi when you do, just go sit. It is only tears rolling out.
So for us, we have seen Vijis like that, full bundle of exuberant and joy is human.
I really wish Vijis was here to see all this. I really wish. She was here to see this.
Life is simple and with that simplicity the highest can be a name. That's Vijis.
Thank you.
