Sadhguru Jagi Vazudev is a realized master, mystic, and yogi.
He has shown the way for people to attain to their natural joy and to live life withexperience from one's own inner nature.
His presence is filled with grace and compassion.
Sadhguru's scientific approach towards spirituality and work towards the upliftment of humanityhave received accolades worldwide.
The words that come from him in intensity and utmost clarity, from his deep understandingand wisdom, can change the very core of the being.
Belonging to no particular tradition, Sadhguru incorporates what is most valid for the modernperson from the spiritual sciences.
His work, an outpouring of his blissfulness, finds expression in the form of a ceaselessoffering to help all beings.
Available to all who are willing, Sadhguru's life is an invitation to the divine throughindividual transformation.
Welcome to the silent revolution of self-realization.
In every culture, anything beyond the normal perception of life, anything beyond the normalday-to-day happenings means it's an opportunity to ask and receive things which are not normallyavailable to people.
The Santa Claus of the West, who is thankful of gifts, or the traditional three-bonesof India, whenever God appears he offers you three-bones, you can ask him what he want.
This interpretation or this direction of love and stories that have, why this love has takenin this direction is always in the world, a large population of the world is always deprived.
It's been so.
A large population in the world is always deprived of many things that they would aspire to have.
All right, I would say almost everybody is deprived of what they want to have.
If they have this, they don't have that.
If they have that, they don't have this.
So almost everyone is deprived of something or the other.
So if a new possibility arises, the first thing is to ask.
And if anybody is of any worth, he's supposed to give.
I know there are various people, there are various prayers and lamentations of the so-calleddevotees where they're swearing by the God and saying, if you cannot even give this,what kind of a God are you?
If you cannot even do this, what kind of a guru are you?
Where is your compassion?
In the Shiva law of Shiva narrates many stories and incidents to highlight the limitationto highlight the trouble that one can get into just by giving indiscriminately.
The trouble that both the giver and the receiver can get into by simply giving somebody somethingthat for which they are not a dare.
If they had evolved their life to a point to that which they are desiring, it wouldanyway happen.
But before they reach there, they won't have it.
Before you evolve yourself to a point where you really receive something, if you receivesomething, the great gift may become a great curse.
There are any number of people on the planet who managed to somehow manipulate situationsto get something that they want and suffer immensely because of what they received.
They would be better off with the desire, but by fulfilling the desire they get intodeep trouble.
So both the giver and the receiver can be in lot of trouble simply by giving somethingor by receiving something for which they are not ready.
Many times human beings, once they attain to a certain level of attainment, they havean urge to be overly compassionate, misplaced compassion always comes from your ego.
You want to be the most compassionate person on the planet.
Wherever anybody needs anything, reach out.
This is not coming from any kind of understanding or wisdom or awareness.
This is coming from wanting to be the best or the most.
You know, whatever you do, you want to be the most.
Wherever you go, even if people say, I am stupid, people want to say, I am the moststupid person in the world, even there they want to start, stand first.
Somehow they want to be the best, one way or the other.
I want to be the most intelligent or I want to be the most stupid.
I don't want to be lost in between.
I don't want to be ordinary.
I want to be somehow special.
So you want to be the most compassionate.
This problem is there among people.
They want to be the most compassionate.
True compassion is not about giving or taking.
True compassion is just doing what's needed.
You have no preferences of your own.
Simply doing what's needed is compassion.
You revving yourself off into a huge amount of emotion and reaching out to somebody isnot compassion.
This is just self-satisfaction, devious ways to fulfill yourself.
Compassion is possible.
Genuine compassion is possible.
When there is nothing to fulfill in you, you're just doing what's needed.
But always, if you get into your deep emotion and do something, you think that was a verycompassionate moment.
No, you're seeking self-fulfillment.
I'm not saying anything right or wrong, it is still coming from a certain inadequacy.
So one overly compassionate sage who was indiscriminately disposing of people's needsbecause of his ostraties, he had attained to a certain capability and he was giving itaway.
So one day Shiva called him and tried to advise him.
See, this is not good.
The way you're dispensing gifts and boons to other people, this will not bring well-beingto you or to the people whom you give.
It may bring you much trouble.
It may bring him much trouble or both of you much trouble.
So stop giving these boons.
People come and ask, it's okay, you don't have to give Parvati, Shiva's wife who wassitting there, she said, oh my Lord, how is this possible?
As it is, there are very few givers in the world.
As it is, there are very few people who are willing to give anything in the world.
Even a few men who are giving, you are trying to restrain them also.
What is the point?
At least a few men who are willing to give, let them give, you must explain this to me.
This is not fair.
There are very few givers.
That also you want to discount and make it much smaller.
Then Shiva said, say, this is not about depriving people of something.
This is not about depriving the world of receiving something.
Nor is it an effort to deprive the person to have the pleasure of giving something.
It is just that instead of helping people to evolve where they will naturally receivethe bounty of life.
An unevolved person, if you give something, you will only overburden him.
You will only destroy his life.
You have your consent about somebody's ultimate well-being.
You must put him through the painstaking process of evolving him to a higher possibility wherehe will receive higher dimensions of life, where receiving just happens to him becauseit deserves it.
If you give a ton of gold to an ant, it will only crush the ant.
It will not make the ant rich, it will only crush the ant.
So what you give, how you give is very important.
You don't just give because somebody is asking.
Let me tell you a story.
Once there was a very sweet sage, sweet one, not like me.
And he sat in his cave in the mountain and was into very stringent ostraties, eatingsimple food, always focused on his sadhana.
One day a king came hunting in the forest, then he found this cave, came inside andsaw the sage, totally absorbed in his meditation.
He bowed down to him and he was thirsty, he wanted to drink water.
He looked around, there he found a real mean-looking vessel, all… you know, a real mean-lookingvessel.
We don't have such a thing in our shop.
In this pose of the mean-looking ones, whether they're vessels or people or whatever, theking thought such a wonderful human being, so deep in his meditation, so dedicated, whyshould he use such a mean-looking vessel?
So he rode back, then he sent some of his men and said, leave two most wonderful goldenurns for him to use, two golden vessels.
So the his king's people came, took away this mean-looking vehicle, vessel and putup these golden vessels.
Even after a few days the sage opened his eyes and to perform his morning ablutionsand also for other purposes, he looked for his vessel, it was not there.
Because he could not find it anywhere, then he found these two golden vessels.
It was not very convenient, there were two, we elaborate, ornate and heavy, but he decidedto use it because there was nothing else.
I've went on for a few days.
One day a very mean-looking person with a mean, very mean mind, with mean intentionscame in the direction.
He walked into the cave and the first thing his eyes fell on the golden vessels.
Then the sage welcomed this man, served him a small meal that he had.
The man ate, but his eyes were fixed on the golden vessel.
The moment the sage closed his eyes to meditate, the man picked up the golden vessel and ran.
When he ran, the sage saw in his meditation this man running away just with a one goldenvessel.
Then the sage ran behind him.
Both of them ran, the man saw the sage coming and ran faster and faster, but because ofall this yoga, you know.
The sage could run faster.
By the time the thief reached the town, the sage caught up with him.
Then that man, he was too tired to do anything else, he placed the golden vessel at the sage'sfeet and said, Forgive me, people gathered around them.
The sage said, No, no, no, I had one more.
You just forgot to take the other one.
I just came here to give you the other one.
The man didn't know what to do and the people who looked at this whole scene, but reallyhumiliated the man because he stole from such a man who is running behind him to give himthe other vessel that he missed out.
The sage went back.
He went back and he started looking for his old vessel.
He searched the whole cave everywhere here, there.
In the process of turning everything around, he pulled out a few baby mice who were there.
Then also the mother mice, the when he pulled turned everything around, these baby micefell out.
The mother mouse terrified, ran away, abandoning the children.
So the sage ended up with five little mice.
The mother was terrified, never came back.
So he started feeding these baby mice with little grain that he had and they were slowlyputting on weight.
One day a cat walked in and mopped up four of them.
The fifth one, the willy one, went and hid in a corner and escaped.
But four of them, the cat mopped it up.
Then this one mice he was feeding it and making it grow.
Then one day the cat came, he chased away the cat, the mouse was so terrified.
So the sage out of his compassion thought, how long can I protect this mouse?
Every time the cat comes, I'll have to open my eyes, I have to come out of my meditation.
This won't work.
Out of his, sit the, out of his capabilities, out of his sadhana that he has done, he decidedto turn this mouse into a fierce cat.
So the mouse became a cat.
So the other star's cat stopped coming because here there is a fierce cat.
After some time, a wild dog came looking for the cat.
Then he chased away the wild dog, but the wild dog hung around, waiting for an opportunityto get the cat.
Then he thought this one doesn't work and again he used his powers, turned the cat intoa dog.
Then the dog was fine for some time and the dog likes to roam around.
One day he came running into the cave with a tail in between his legs.
When the sage saw a panther was chasing the dog, he stopped the panther, chased away thepanther.
Then he sat there and thought, this is getting too troublesome.
Every time I close my eyes, either I have to protect a mouse or a cat or a dog or something.
So he's decided the best thing is to turn this into a lion.
He'll be the king of the jungle.
Then I can turn him loose in the forest, he will be safe.
I will have no problems.
So he turned this dog into a big lion.
Now the lion roamed about the forest when he walked every other animal ran away seeingthe lion, but though this was the body of a lion, it still had the heart of a mouse.
He was feeling very difficult.
If they come to know that I am just a mouse, what will they do to me?
He was always going through this struggle.
You know, many people are going through this.
In the society, in the world they are like lions, but inside they are like mice.
They are constantly struggling within themselves always.
Whenever a person is placed in a situation which is beyond his rit or want, then thatperson will suffer so much insecurity and fear.
Because of this fear, in his mind, so many evil thoughts will arise.
This happens every other day in the world.
All the time it's happening, it happens here also in ashram.
If you give somebody which is beyond their want, if you give somebody which is beyondtheir capabilities, if you give somebody beyond what they deserve, suddenly they become somean-minded because somewhere inside they are small, they have to put on the big act.
Now they will start thinking all kinds of nonsense.
So this lion was feeling very insecure.
He's a lion as far as the world is concerned.
Everybody's afraid of him, but within himself he's a mouse.
Then he thought, the only other person who knows that I am a mouse is the sage.
If I finish him off, nobody will know that I am a mouse.
I will be a real lion.
With this intention he walked into the cave.
The sage was sitting and meditating.
The lion slowly approached him because if she… the lion finishes off the sage, nobodyin the world will know that this is a mouse.
As he came closer, the sage realized, then he looked at the lion and said, this was notright of me to turn a mouse at your lion and he turned the lion back into your mouse andsaid, get out of here, fend for your own life.
It is nature for a cat to eat a mouse, for a dog to eat a cat, for a bigger animal toeat the dog.
It is natural.
Unless they evolved to that position.
If you give them that position, they will only suffer and they will bring sufferingupon everybody.
Sushiva went on with this story and he went further, I will stop here.
Now this traditional what to say, temptation that they have created in people, if you eversee a holy person, if you ever see a sage or a saint, first thing is ask for what youwant, it will happen.
I am telling you, never ask because if he is wise he will not give, but sometimes heis just in a state where he says, okay.
If he says, okay, you are in trouble because you will get something that you are not readyfor.
If you get things that you are not ready for, life doesn't become better, life only becomesturmoil in so many ways.
So when you sit in a certain space, when you sit in a certain energy, if you notice a certainperson or a place, he is creating a certain level of energy.
It seems to be a little bigger possibility than what you are.
That is a time when you don't think of anything, when you don't ask for anything, you simplysit.
If you simply sit, you will get the necessary nutrient to evolve very fast, to mutate fromone dimension to another.
Once you grow into a certain possibility, everything that is possible in that dimensionwill anyway happen to you.
If you do not grow into that possibility, but just aspire for that, then you are justbringing heaps of trouble upon yourself.
Also meditation, temple, jana-linga or sitting in the guru is not a time to ask.
It is a time to imbibe and allow this one to evolve with your higher possibility sothat if it evolves, what has to happen to it will anyway happen.
I feel that there is a very fine line between being trustful and being naive.
How can I manage this?
Which one are you?
Right now.
You know, a month ago I was in Hyderabad.
After I spoke in one of the meetings, the local newspaper next I reported, Sadhgurudenies God.
Headlines, they put, the heading of the article was, Sadhguru denies God or something likethis and it went on to describe how I deny God.
Why these things happening is simply because instead of using your nigh-white, I am constantlytrying to help you to be doubtful about everything.
Because I am telling people, anyway you have a doubt about everything, you don't trustanybody in your life, please see this.
You don't really trust anybody in your life.
Even people with whom you have lived for ten years, twenty years, if they do one act thatyou cannot understand immediately all kinds of suspicion will arise about them, isn'tit?
Yes or no?
If they do just one thing that you cannot understand, any number of suspicions will comein your mind.
Sadhguru is always a suspect.
So naturally there are more suspicions about him than anybody else.
Unfortunately, that's the reality.
That is why the possibility which is so close is so far away.
So I am not asking you to be trustful, I am always asking you to doubt.
Doubt is fine with me, but suspicion is a sickness.
Doubt means you are looking as to what is the truth.
Suspicious means you have made a conclusion about it.
Doubt means you don't know you are looking.
That is a good state to be.
You are looking constantly.
Doubt means you are suspicious and constantly wondering, is the other person much smarterthan me and still taking me for a ride in spite of all my suspicions?
These people think they are naive, they are actually suspicious, but they are constantlywondering that the other person may be so much smarter than them and still taking themfor a ride.
Isn't it so?
There is no really naive person in the world.
They are suspicious people who are dumb.
Dumb and suspicious.
Suspicious is not intelligence.
In fact, the lower the level of your intelligence, more suspicious you are in your nature.
Somebody who is intelligent naturally trusts people around him, at least in the day today affairs.
People who have a small mind or suspicious about everybody around them, have you noticedthis?
The less intelligent they are, the more suspicious they are always because they can't see, figureout one thing from the other.
They are constantly afraid that somebody will misuse them.
They are constantly fear that somebody is going to take them for a ride.
So they will be very suspicious, but they are clueless.
So they call themselves naive, they are not naive, they are suspicious, but with the brainsof a caterpillar.
Now, how do the question is, how do I know whether I have been taken for a ride or not?
Let's come directly to it.
Isn't it?
That's a question, isn't it?
Let me tell you, you are being taken for a ride because you are still not at in thatstage where I can either expose or impose or even tell you what it is about.
It is like, I don't know if you have seen, but you come from a Asian family, you mighthave seen.
In India especially, mothers have a whole technology as to how to stuff the child withmore food than you would normally eat.
You know, this technology.
Now they will take so much rise and whatever in the plate.
The child says, no, this is too much, I am not going to eat that.
So, okay, you eat one half of it.
This half, as the child begins to eat, they will mix everything together again.
Let's say the child is eating half of this half, then they will mix this thing togetherand then again, the child says, no, it's too much, so again make it half.
Okay, okay, only half I'll give you, again make it half.
Like this, they will go on doing and in the end, showing kakama, goama, chandamama, thisone, that one, you know, all kinds of distractions and unknowingly the child will eat up the wholeplate full of rice.
Definitely the mother is taking the child for a ride, isn't it?
Yes?
Similarly, the guru is also constantly taking his disciples or devotees for a ride becauseif you really tell them what they are supposed to swallow, they will just say, this is impossibleand they will run away.
So because you like everything in installments, I'm taking you for a ride in installments,but it'll never happen in installments.
It is whole or nothing, but your willingness comes in installments.
Do you see, the first day you arrived at the introductory, what level of willingness youwere and today what level of willingness you are, slowly we have taken you for a ride,isn't it?
Making you a little more willing, little more willing, little more willing.
The way I'm talking to you today, if I had spoken to you on that day, you would have left,never to see my face again, isn't it so?
So we are taking you for a ride.
Sadhguru, what is personality?
How does one develop it?
If you look at what you call as a human being, it's a certain amount of life energy manifestedwithin a certain form.
As there is a physical form, there is also an energy form to complement that.
But that also is a structured form.
The more and more one develops his personality, personality means the more and more you identifyyourself with certain limited qualities in life, you become a strong personality.
You have very strong sense of what is right and wrong, you have very strong sense of whatyou like and dislike, all these things establish your personality.
This makes you rigid.
With this rigidity, in the physical spheres of life, you can push your way through becauseyou have a strong personality.
All the time today especially, if you are planning to become something in the world,let's say you want to become an exugative, you want to be run a corporate, whatever,or you want to start your own business, people are telling you, you must believe in yourself.
You must tell yourself, I'm great, I can do it, kind of things.
You're trying to establish your personality so that you can push your way through in theworld.
Some kind of physical success in the world, some kind of success which is socially relevantcould be achieved by having a strong personality.
Now when we say a spiritual process, we are trying to dissolve this personality becausethe stronger your personality, the more rigid your energies become.
The more rigid your energies are, less the possibility of you transcending into higherdimensions of life because you are sort of concretized yourself with your likes and dislikes,opinions, ideas, philosophies, whatever.
So spiritual process means we are trying to dissolve all that you created.
First of all, to understand why we are trying to dissolve this is, why did you constructsomething?
Simply because somewhere you never tasted the basis of who this is, you never experiencedthis one, so you are trying to build a false entity which will somehow survive.
Where you felt so inadequate as a being that you are trying to become some kind of a personwith some strength because you never tasted the strength of this being.
Now you're trying to taste the false strength of your personality because there is sucha deep insecurity of being, not worthwhile.
You are trying to make yourself worthwhile by building a personality.
And these personalities, what kind of personality you build is subject to so many inputs thatyou take in your life, is subject to what you are exposed to, your culture, your religion,your family, your education, all these things are playing a role in building your personality.
As I said, it's socially relevant.
It has no life relevance.
Your personality cannot go anywhere.
It can go to the office, it can go home, it can go on the street, but it has no placeto turn inward.
It cannot touch any other dimension of your life.
It is only a tool to push your way through in the world.
When you say I'm turning spiritual, now you have a longing to taste, experience and establishyourself in other dimensions of life.
If that has to happen, you need a presence, you need connection with life, not with thefalse structures that you have built.
So all sadhana is towards that.
So when a… as a person becomes a spiritual possibility, that means he has become moremalleable.
He is not rigid.
He is no more a burnt pot.
If we look at you like a pot, he is no more a burnt earthen pot.
He's just formed himself because he also has to still live in the society, but thisis a mud pot which is just clay, anytime you could melt it and let water inside burst forth.
He has not burnt his clay, he has kept it.
Wrong.
Any moment you want, if you just… if he just dips himself into the water, he will be gone.
Look, you make a pot out of the earth.
If you don't burn it, if you just dip it into the water, two minutes and try to takeit out, nothing will come with you, it's all gone.
But if you burn it, if you keep it there for ten years, still it won't go, it is rightthere.
So what you are doing in terms of building a personality is the form that is necessaryto survive in this existence, you are concretizing it.
That means you are de-concreteizing it so that it is malleable, you still maintain a form,you still play around with the personality, but it is not you, any moment you want, youcan just drop it.
Now you can enjoy your person also, but above all you enjoy your presence.
Less personality you carry, more presence you have, more personality you carry.
Very little presence you have.
So all sadhana is towards this, to dissolve the personality and enhance the presenceof life in you.
Sadhguru, what is desire?
Buddha says we must give up all desire, how to do it.
Do you want to know the answer?
Do you want to know the answer?
Yes?
Do you have a desire for it or no?
Do you have a desire to know this answer or no?
Yes.
So the very basis of everything that you are is desire, isn't it?
If somebody says give it up, just because somebody says give it up, can you give itup?
All you will land up with is you will have a huge desire to give up all desires.
I don't want to have any desires.
Is that also a desire?
Yes or no?
Is that also a desire?
So tell me, what will you do without a desire?
Your very existence is desire, isn't it?
Yes.
This heart is beating, this breath is happening, the body is functioning, every cell in thebody is pulsating right now because there is an enormous amount of desire in everything.
Otherwise, it cannot exist.
So what you call as life and what you call as desire is not different.
If you drop your desire, you will drop your life.
Are you ready?
No, no.
Say you have a desire to live obviously.
So don't take up philosophies which are against the very basis of your life by misunderstandingsomebody who lived here 2,500 years ago.
You did not listen to Buddha.
You read all those books that stupid scholars wrote about him.
2,500 years later, see already what was said just a month ago in the class, it has changedcolor in your utterance.
2,500 years later if you talk about me, you know how you will interpret me.
So many distortions will happen, isn't it?
So Gautama could not have said something so stupid as drop your desires.
He's an intelligent man obviously.
He knew his way to the beyond.
He taught the way to the beyond 2,000s of people.
So he cannot say such a stupid thing as drop your desire because wanting to drop my desireitself is desire, isn't it?
He won't say such things.
Let us not dig up his grave and make him roll around.
It's not necessary.
Too much misinterpretations have happened to all the Buddha, the Krishna, the Rama, the
Jesus is.
Too much misinterpretation has happened.
That's why I'm saying, don't bother about those people.
You don't have to bother about them because they lived wonderfully.
You only have to do karmas to those people who lived badly, isn't it?
Yes?
Like your father or grandfather, you have to perform karmas to slowly push them to heavenbecause they must have lived badly.
You don't have to do any karma to Gautama, Buddha or a Krishna or somebody else becausethey know their way.
They know their way here, they know their way beyond.
You don't have to do anything to them.
So, leave them alone.
If they have inspired you to come here, their job is done.
They cannot do anything more now.
If their stories have inspired you to seek a spiritual process, that is good, nothingbeyond that they can do.
So let us not interpret them or misinterpret them now.
You look at it from your own intelligence.
If you look at it from your own intelligence, can you see that no desire, no life, yes orno?
Yes.
So let's proceed from there.
Now all the desires that you desire, will they be fulfilled?
Can all be.
So many of them will naturally be unfulfilled.
So desire is not the source of misery.
Unfulfilled desire is the source of misery.
Desire, when it's fulfilled, it's a source of joy, isn't it so?
The only joy that you know is fulfilling desires, is it so?
The only joy that you know in your life is fulfilling desires, isn't it?
And the only misery that you know is unfulfilled desires.
So, what you call as desire seems to be falling both ways.
The source of your joy is desire.
The source of your misery is desire.
I'm telling you, the source of your very life is desire.
So you cannot destroy the desire and have a wonderful life.
You are my perfect mirror, you show me what I'm not.
For you are my perfect mirror, you show me what I'm not.
You are my perfect mirror, you show me what I'm not.
You show me what I'm not.
You show me what I'm not.
You show me what I'm not.
