Sadhguru is a realized master, yogi, and a profound mystic of our times.
His work is an outpouring of his blissfulness that finds expression in the form of uninhibitedcompassion, love, and a ceaseless offering to help all beings.
Going to no particular tradition, Sadhguru incorporates what is most valid for the modernseeker from the spiritual sciences, from his powerful yoga programs for inner transformation,to his inspiring projects for society and the environment.
Sadhguru's work is an endeavor to create an inclusive culture that is the basis for globalharmony and progress.
His public satsangs and programs draw hundreds of thousands of people from all walks of life,creating a huge spiritual wave in each city.
These classes provide individuals with the tools to optimize all aspects of health,inner growth, and success.
Available to all who are willing, Sadhguru's life is an invitation to the divine throughindividual transformation.
Sadhguru works with the world's preeminent leaders and institutions to foster peace,global understanding, and international cooperation.
He has addressed a number of prestigious international forums and has conducted special programsfor various groups and corporations to instill an inner balance which empowers one to effectivelyhandle external situations.
Prasun Joshi is a name synonymous with a new era of creativity in India.
Through the many disciplines of creativity he excels in, he has touched millions of liveswith his words, ideas, thoughts, and share craft.
His culturally rich and insightful work in the field of advertising and communicationwith campaigns like Happy Dint, Tundamatlabh Kukakoda, and Kormint has put India and Asiaon the international stage, he has won more than 400 awards and has also been designateda young global leader by World Economic Forum.
He has also chaired prestigious international juries in festivals like GANS.
But today he is also well renowned for his unparalleled work in the world of poetry,songwriting, and cinema.
He has had a torchbearer of the young breed of writer poets.
Prasun has emerged as one of the most talented and evocative voices in the country in thelast decade, one that has kept the flame of poetry alive with his fourth book of Poetic
Song Collection and has helped establish a connect with a new generation.
He was one of the few young writers who had his first book of prose published when hewas just 17 years of age.
He was bestowed the prestigious Vatayan Award for his contribution to the Hindi languageand literature.
Given to him in a ceremony in the House of Lords in London, he then went on to chartnew courses.
In a very short span of time, Prasun has proved wrong many of those who lamented the declinein quality and lack of taste in poetry amongst the new generation.
To his songs in mainstream films like Rang Devasanti, Thare Zameepur, Delhi Six, andvery recently Bhag Milka Bhag, he not only made the nation's youth fall in love withhis work, but he has also made the connoisseur stand up and applaud.
Prasun did have a tough task on hand with a rapidly changing taste of young India anda shrinking vocabulary.
However, he not only wrote path-breaking songs but also constantly wrote poetry on socialissues.
His poem, post the terrorist attack in Mumbai, Isbar Nahim, became the nation's outcry.
His Bar Nahim, His Bar Jabu Chauti Sipachi, Mele Basapni Harochile Karayagi, Mele Use Pupukar,
Nheba Long, Mepanapne Dungal Skikiso, His Bar Nahim.
Thus, he has kept alive the tradition and ethos of poets who have not only utilized poetrybut 130 some days later, no Indian can ever forget Prasun's Song.
From Thare Zameepur, a song that left every mother in the country really beied.that inspired the young generation.
Prasun's work in Bhagma Kappar,of which he has written the script, screenplay,dialogues and songs,has won critical acclaim in many hearts.
Prasun was awarded Indian of the Yearby NDTV for his creations.
He has been the recipient of many honorsfor his artistic work, including film fails,screen, iPhone, and the coveted National Awardfrom the President of India,his other masterpieces, like Masakali,
Ginda Poon, Jamsi Farish,
Hantum, Mola,
Dilgirakhempidavtan,
Zindahai Toqialla Purabharle,or his non-film work,
Abkeh Savan,
Sikonar,or Mankeh Manjiri,holds a special place in the heart of poetryand music lovers.
Prasun Joshi is a unique writer poetwho has displayed sensitivity and excellenceon key social and national issues.
Guchika Guzareco,
Kunchala, Kunchala,
Konajaye,
Dharizami Pern,
Sakyami,
Sakyami,
Sakyami Bajarvay,
Kunchala,
Kunchala,
Kunchala,
Purabharle,
De Kuzaratharke,
Meradesh Bovah,
Meradesh,
Meradesh.
Kaposhan bachokeshariir de maakdono koi,
Zindahai Parkeleir kamsor banadita,
Arjapachayimas bhutayhyungi tu desh kesamas butoh,
Dhariyim Milker is haternathishman kehilath,
Ekjangcheren.
They can look forward to more path-breaking workfrom this extremely talented,new generation brighter poet.
In September 2012,
Prasun Joshi met Sadhguru in Kashito explore the intricate sciencebehind the city of light.
In a walk around the city,
Sadhguru revealsthe most mystical aspects of Kashi.
What would you define death as?
It is a fiction of the ignorant,created by the ignorant.
There's no such thing as death.
They're just life, life and life,moving from one dimension to another.
More such questions led to this conversation,which explores the mysteries of death.
Good evening to everyone.
I think it's an honour to be talkingwith Sadhguru.
This subject which is...
It's quite strange thatthe first poem I ever wrote in my life,which when I didn't even understand what I was writing,was about death.
And then we exploredtogether in Kashi and
Sadhguru enlightened me with a lot ofaspects which I never thought about.
And after that we lost someone in the familyand more questions started coming around it.
I will start with that poem.
This is the old first one.
This is my first poem.
That's nice.
This is quite an...
It's quite a coincidence.
And the thought is...is in the kind of Hindi I used to write then.
So a lot of things,probably my mother used to call me
Katin Kavakapret.
So those days I used to feel pride in using wordswhich nobody will understand.
So I willexplain it to you.
Basically thought is
Apalak is when you don't blink.
So when you look at something beautiful,you become Apalak...
Palak naylakthiyak.
When you die, you don't blink.
What have you looked at?
Is death so beautiful that you never blink after that?
APPLAUSE
APALAK niharna sandhiriko
Anum huttikadyotak pangata.
APALAK niharna sandhiriko
Anum huttikadyotak pangata.
APALAK hiho yata hahmaneshu.
Yap karta hahalingand nutukha.
Taapkansi anum hutti hutti hoteo say.
Is anum hutti say.
Kavivapas naheilata.
Sadhguru,why is death alwaysportrayed as dark, sinister?
Why is there heaviness?
Why is so much fear attached to it?
I know you have called it somewhere cosmic joke.
But most of the civilizations,whether it's Egyptian, ancient, Jew, Indian,barring a few civilizations,
I've seen and I think probably somewhere alsotry to celebrate death.
But if you look at,mostly the civilizations,ancient civilizations all have some sort of heavinessand even the symbols,if you see Yamaraj as a symbol, if you see,or you see the grim griper.
You see, there is some heaviness or darknessand certain kind of imagery which comes with death.
Why is it so sadhguru?
If we look at how we have perceivedand portrayed death in this part of the world,you will see that death is not seen as sinister.
But the dark patch of the death isfor the living, that there is a loss.
Loss is always a dark thing,whether small things are big things,people break down and they lose somethingthat's precious to them.
It could be things, it could be people,it could be many things, you know.
So, the darkness is only concernedwith the living about the death.
But the death itself in this culture, particularly,always been portrayed as a grand event.
It's only now that Indians are imitating the westand walking with faces held down,otherwise, even today it is there.
When people die, we wear white clothes, not dark clothes.
There is a certain science behind that,
I'll look at that later.
Above all, there are wonderful stories.
The legend goes like this.
Shiva is always waiting at the Mahasma Shana.
He's made that he's a bold because he's waiting.
And every time somebody dies, he dances in celebration.
What kind of a purver can he be?
That somebody dear to me is dead and he will dance and celebrate.
Let's look at the fundamental aspect of what life isbecause they're not two different things.
What we call as life right now in the experienceof most human beings is just the body that they have accumulatedand a certain amount of thought and emotionthat they have accumulated around themselves.
It's very clear to any human beingwho pays a little attention to the nature of his life,that he can clearly see that bodies and accumulation,the psychological structure is also an accumulation.
Now, beyond these things, there is life.
So what you call as life is,when you were children, I'm sure you definitely did blow some soap bubbles.
When you blew a soap bubble, the bubble was real.
But what was inside the bubble is just the atmosphere all over.
When the bubble burst, one drop of the soap water fell on the floor,rest of the whole content of the bubble, where it went,you can never see because it's just never was,because it's just a part of everything.
This is the nature of life.
The whole cosmos is a living mass of life.
You built a bubble, when the bubble burst,and those if somebody has a perspective of the other aspector the other side, let's look at life and death like this.
You're in this side of the wall, somebody else is on the other side of the wall.
When the bubble burst and this air which was or this life which was trappedin this bubble became released, and what's happening on the other side is way biggerthan what can happen within the trap of physicality.
So he is laughing, singing and dancing because one life got releasedfrom the mortal coil as it has always been described.
Sir, through the fact that somebody has gone and this calamityor whatever you call it has happened, is it conditioning that we have to perceive itthat in such a big way, such a big event, I remember there was a death in the familyand an old dead woman had died and I had gone there and there was a kid playingand I told you about this earlier that a child was playing with a pinky godand very naturally while he was playing with the car, he went over that body,dead body, when people pulled him, he started playing like it's a thing like that.
Such things happen and I remember it also.
No, but the child had no, no registration of death.
Is a registration learnt?
Is a registration a conditioning?
See, the death being seen as a tragedy is physiologically,psychologically, emotionally and socially a reality, existentially it's not a reality.
A child is an offspring of life.
He's not at a slave of social conditioning.
So he will even play with the death, he wouldn't matter.
But adults will try to condition the child because they feel it's inappropriate,something has been lost or above all.
Did, when somebody dies you think it's the end of the world actually.
If somebody is very dear to you, in your thought, in your emotion,most people would actually feel that it's the end of the world.
But after some time they come around.
Now the child doesn't take that time lag, he comes around quicklybecause he's not so influenced by what's happening in the society.
This is purely psychological and emotional structure.
When I say psychological and emotional structure, it's our making.
We could make it whichever way we want.
And you will see in this country when somebody dies,maybe all the so-called educated people have given it up.
But if somebody dies in the slum, they'll beat the drum and they're having a party.
I'm not trying to belittle the loss that a person goes through.
But all psychological factors, your thoughts, your emotions and social opinions and situationsare only relevant to a certain point.
Beyond that, existentially what you think, what you feel, what your society thinksare absolutely irrelevant.
That is why we always positioned one who we consider as the highest on the edge.
He's always on the cremation ground.
This is how every yogi starts his life.
Today, those who are seriously on the path, we always send them to the cremation groundto spend a certain amount of time because mortality has to sink into you.
You must understand the essential nature of your life.
Only when you realize your mortal, the longing to know beyond will arise.
If you think of God, you will not become spiritual.
Actually, you could become very stupid.
You will try to think that by…
You know, you could do idiotic things in your life with a prayer, everything will be fixed.
You don't do your job properly, but you… you think there'll be a result.
You don't study for your exam and you think you're coming first class because of your prayer.
All kinds of idiotic things will happen.
But the moment you address the mortal nature of who you are,the longing to know what this is all about,wanting to know what is beyond this thing that people are here, real, real,and tomorrow morning, poof, suddenly absent.
What is beyond this?
Wanting to know this will become a natural quest and that is the spiritual process.
Sadhguru, the mortality, if you… if you're told that you're…you're only six months left, one has seen…if one is told that you're six months left or one year left,suddenly there is a change in behavior of the human being.
They start prioritizing lot of things and lot of changes happen.
But don't we actually know we are mortals?
Don't we actually know that we have limited times,but we still don't want to believe that we have limited time?
Why does… why does a human being behave as if…is it a denial of a kind?
Unless you are definitely by medical science told that now your time starts.
The time has already started, the clock is on.
If you want a prediction for all of you, when you will die,
I can tell you somewhere little less than a hundred years all of you will die.
The clock is already on, but it needs a doctor's warrant or a judge, you know, this…the nature and the creation and the creator have already told you,but you still don't believe it or you have not paid enough attention to it.
It's like this. One day a bishop, a Catholic bishop and a judge met on the golf course.
A judge is playing golf.
Catholic bishop is sneaking the game that he is not supposed to do these frivolous things,but he is playing, he likes it.
So… but he was feeling a little uncomfortable because the judge hits the ball straight.
His ball with God's grace goes in every direction.
So he said, what is so big about your profession, your judge?
At the most… what can you say?
You can say, may you be hanged, but I can say, may you be damned.
So the judge paid attention to the ball, took a good shot, and then he looked at him and said,when I say, be hanged, they hang.
Sadhguru, the… the way we treat bodies after death.
There are lot… rituals around it.
On one hand, we keep hearing that this is a transition, this is… this was a body youwere in and it is meaningless after that.
It's no meaning.
The Atman has left the body.
Why do we have so many rituals around that body?
It's just to decide, try to insert a little bit of poetry in this so that, you know,because the questions in this subject are not actually sufficient to convey a lot of things.
But since one has encountered death and one has tried to capture this seagull,it's about the cage and the bird has flown away.
And you are looking at the empty cage, case.
That's the… that's the scene in your head.
Panchi Urugaya, Vindira Kali.
Panchi Urugaya, Vindira Kali, Tarr Tarr, Ekakhi Sitar, Cheeru Tushanata, Kato Tochune.
Panchi Urugaya, Vindira Kali, Tarr Tarr, Ekakhi Sitar, Cheeru Tushanata, Kato Tochune.
Kato Tochune, Niki Dhoni, A
Lakhirihai, A
Lohai,
Parakirbi, Lakhirikos Parshkartai Man.
Lakhirikos Parshkartai Man.
Kabisaman, Kabik Prem, Kabi Vitrishna, Samneh Bahi Kole Kala Akash, Satyapatacakai.
Samneh Bahi Kola Kole Kala Akash, Satyapatacakai, Us Asman, Vilin Ho Chukihai, Kuran,
Vindiraheme Nahi Heab, Jairayaki, Pudak, Kirbi Akhetakti He, Harli Vindiraeko,
Smritikosh, Dhab Dhabajate, Kuch Bhagalash, Chalak Jate.
I am not that good with the language you have to tell me.
So that's the reason I explain that this is about the cage.
It's about the emptiness of it and still a desire to look at it, the whole family,the whole the people, look at that as if somehow life will come back.
Then we have rituals around it.
How is it?
Why do you treat bodies in various cultures the way they treat?
You know more about it.
In any culture I have gone to, I've seen bodies have been treated in a special way.
What is the reason for that?
And if you can also talk about disembodied beings in this context,a lot of questions around that people have requested me to ask,something which is never dwelled upon.
And I know it's a little difficult subject to deal with.
But I think everybody deals with this body and facing the dead body in front of you.
See, to understand why there is a certain process as to how you treat the body beyonddropping it.
As you earlier mentioned, on another level people are talking about how once you havea life has exited the body it means nothing, it's just mud.
Yes.
Yes.
The reason is this, as life does not engage with the body just like that, it happens as a process.
When a woman or a mother conceives,two little cells coming together then becomes a meatball literally.
But this meatball to become a life, it is somewhere between forty to forty-eight daysafter conception that the life process enters.
Let us understand what is life process.
The life process, the life is there in the mother's body also.
So where does it have to enter?
Those of you who have two children, you'd have noticed this otherwise you might havenoticed with others, even on the day the infant is born, even on that day between one child andother, characterically they're very different, the way they move their hands, the way theynow make noises, the way they pay attention, it's very different, same parentage, same genetics,same everything, but they're very different, have you noticed this?
Because the information package that is entered, that particular piece of life is always unique,never the same as the other.
This may make you write poetry at the age of what, seventeen, seventeen.
So somebody else wouldn't have thought about poetry.
Some of these things may happen because of exposure, but nobody can deny that human beingsdo things out of innate capabilities everywhere across the planet, there's no question about that.
Now this life process is happening and one day death happens, what is this death?
Why does it happen?
The information package, which in traditional terms we call as karmic body,or it's called a sanchita, a large package of information.
Let's not go to where it came from and all that it will lead us to a different place, butdistinctly you can find out if you observe just born two children, obviously the input that hasgone into them is different. Every mother would know it, every person who works in a hospitalor a maternity home would definitely know it because everyday observing children born,distinctly different always, even if they come of the same parents.
This package has two different dimensions. One is called a sanchita, which is a warehouse ofkarma, huge information. Where does this information come right now? How do we generate this information?
There are five senses seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching. Every moment of our life,this is gathering input. For example, if you walk from here to here, I'm saying if you walk 10meters, there will be 25 different kind of smells. Most of them you will not notice in normal courseof observation, only if it's acute, either it's too pleasant or too unpleasant, you will notice it.
All the mild things you will not notice, but all this is recorded. Every sight, every smallinflection, every sound, everything is recorded. Suppose you're sleeping, fastest sleeping,
I will come and speak in a language that you will not understand. Above all you're sleeping,you're completely unconscious of this. 25 years later, we can hypnotize you and make you speakall the sentences that I spoke without knowing the language, just repeating those sounds.
This memory is deeply entrenched in the system. These experiments have been done and we have alwaysknown this. So this volume of information that you're gathering in wakefulness and sleep is phenomenal.
It's because of such a volume of information, so many aspects of our life happen automatically.
If that information is not there, you wouldn't know how to walk, you wouldn't know how to stand,you wouldn't know how to sit, this will happen. Because of such a volume of information, it isassimilated in a certain way, it's not a conscious process, unconsciously it's happening.
So this information will allot itself, which is known as prarabht, I'm sure, in the previousgeneration, your mothers and grandmothers, when they see you doing something unreasonable,they said it's your prarabht. That means it's your allotted karma, it's playing outbecause it's allotted. That part of your memory and your information is just… that part ofyour software is just playing out. It's not in your hands to control it, it's simply playing out,that's what they mean when they say, is your prarabht that you're behaving like this.
Now this prarabht runs out at a certain time, depending upon how you live. There are differentdimensions to this, but let's say it starts running down. When it starts running down,the software that you have for this life is slowly wearing out. Your body may be still strong andgood, but software is running out. Now it becomes feeble. Once the information is become less,the life energies will become feeble. Once life energy becomes feeble, below a certain point,it will exit the body. This is considered a normal death. This is a good death,it's a good way to die, that you ran out of the software and you exited. Most people choose to diein a way that they break the body in some way and they make the body inhospitable for life,either with a car crash or a heart attack or a lung cancer or whatever. In some way,we made the body inhospitable for life. So life exits. If the life exited because it is run outof software, then this life is very feeble. There's nothing much to be done about this.
Where do you think or suggest where life begins? Is it in the womb? Is it when you are delivered?
Is it when does the soul enter the body? Now you are assuming things.
Well, I've heard from whatever my learning and conditioning as you can call.
I'm talking about you and me and people here. Now you're bringing an other person called soul.
Yes. Let us use the word life because the word soul is heavily contaminated.
You know, people are finding soul mates. It's very clear. It's very, very clear.
Your body needs a mate. Your mind may need a mate. But the soul, if it is absolute,it definitely will not need a mate, isn't it? But so many things have, let's call it life.
Okay. It's less corrupted word. So the life that you are, the person that you are is different.
The person that you are is the making and molding of many things that have happened around you,the impacts that life has had on you, external life has had on you. But the life that you are,which keeps all this going, this has come with a certain information. If it runs out of theinformation or the software is gone, then this life exits the body because its term is over.
But if its term is still on, but you break the body for some reason, now it exits. When itexits like this, now the reverberance of life is at a higher pitch. It should not have left,but it is left. Now for this life, a lot of things have to be done. Otherwise you will leave it inthe wild and it will go on. What would have been, let's say, if it lived in this body,maybe in another three years or five years it would complete its term. But without a physicalframe, these five years may become five hundred years. Why I'm saying this is time matters to youonly because you're physical. Right now if you sit here, now this session is for two hours onlybecause you have a body. Because in two hours, it wants to go to the toilet, it wants to drink,it wants to eat, it wants to do so many things. Suppose you had nobody, we could make this twocenturies session, two millennia, what's the problem? Time is a consequence for you only becauseyou're physical, because you gathered your physicality. If you did not gather physicality,time would mean nothing, space would mean nothing. So when you leave the physical frame,now time and space does not mean anything. But because of this, because the reverberance is stillthere, it can go endlessly. No, when you say you leave, you know, you almost assume and that's whereprobably ordinary person cannot relate with. When you say you leave, as if you have the choice toleave, you say that this guy, this life decided because of accident or whatever to leave. Thislife did not decide. At least the way we see our loved ones around us, we see somebody elsedecided, some happening decided. And well, there are other kind of deaths one hears about the
Samadhi and conscious dying. Probably that's not the kind of dying this is, this is an accident.
Also, I would like you to explain what is a stillborn baby? What is the life span of that,which is stillborn? Now where that manifestation gone, where is that prarabhgana gone?
Now, let us look at the varieties of death, the menu, death menu.
Because just today morning somebody sent me a mail saying that someone has opened a deathcafe in UK. So let me give you the death menu. The different ways a human being can die isbefore you're out of your mother's womb, you could be aborted. A abortion is one form of death.
The next is, you can call it still birth. It could have happened beyond a certain time.
Now, this after conception has happened and life has entered this somewhere between 40 to 48 days.
That is when it becomes alive. I don't know what the medical opinion is, are there any doctors here?
Okay. All right. I'm saying this from my personal experience. It's 40 to 48 days.
That's a space where you enter. There are some lives which enter later. Suppose, see, this issomething a woman or a mother could feel if we train her a little bit. If she sees that a lifeentered beyond 48 days, then you're delivering somebody truly special because this life will taketime to settle in. Some phenomenal life is on the way. You have heard somebody sees, you know,
Gautama's mother and this man says, you are going to deliver a phenomenal being. Somebody looksat Yeshoda and says to the mother, you are delivering a phenomenal being. This is simply becausewhen you notice after 48 days of conception, still life has not entered, but enters a littlelater than that. This means you are expecting a phenomenal being to arrive. Why it is so?
If I go into the intricacies, it'll take you somewhere. But normal life enters somewherebetween 40 to 48 days. Now, after this, for some reason, after all, whom is a manufacturing unitof this body? For some reason, if the, the body did not form itself appropriately for that life,or for any life, then the life chooses to exist before it's developed. So this is a still-born baby.
Or sometimes because of whatever compulsions a mother may choose to abort the child, that isanother form of thing. But in these things, the engagement with the body for this life trulybegins somewhere approximately between 84 to 90 days is where really life gets engaged.
Till then it's foraging. It is looking, if this is suitable, if this oombis the right place.
This is not a conscious thing. This is an unconscious tendency wise. It is seeing if it matchesby tendencies. The appropriate word for this is, traditionally, we call this vassana.
Depending upon your vassana, you're looking for an appropriate body. So, though it is partiallyengaged, it can exit before 90 days. Before between 80 to 84 to 90 days, the life gets properlyengaged. From then on, it's a proper baby. From then on, it's a proper life. After that,you should not disturb that. Human's nourishment, it doesn't matter. In what context it has happened.
So, this life process, this is abortion, still birth. Next thing is an accident can happen.
It can be of any kind. That means body broke. Because the body broke, life cannot sustain itselfin that body, so it exits. The next thing is suicide. Because of some extraneous situation,somebody decides to end it. The next possibility is death by occult processes. This is one of theworst ways that things can happen because it destabilizes. The information match which isentrenched you in a particular system. When I say the information match, the tendencies of thatparticular life is seeking a match with the genetic material the parents are providing.
When that match is disturbed, people will die a terrible death. Terrible for various reasons,because not only for what they may go through at that time, terrible because of the long durationthat it takes to solve this issue that's happened within itself. So, death by occult processes.
And the next thing is, as you already mentioned, a samadhi or a conscious way of exiting. This isthe whole menu. So, if you had a choice that you could die the way you want to die, would you liketo leave in any of these ways or consciously? Because it's a, it's a last act that you perform inyour life and you get to do it only once. You may get married four times, but you can only die once.
So, you must do it in style. It's very important.
But Sadhguru here, when you said accident, I and, and find the life as accident,but there are few people who go through this life support. Now, what do you call that? Is that aperiod the person is there? And also, when you're talking about samadhi and conscious dying,you know, one has seen in India there was a way people used to leave the place and go to aplace like Kashi and will die the preparation for death. And in today's context, how do you see that?
The preparation for death or drying, dying gracefully or going somewhere else inplease and so the two questions. One is about life support. What is the state of life in the life support?
See, the business of the doctors and the medical science should be to help the living.
It's not for them to enter the realm of death. As you said, it's life support, not preventionof death, okay? So, somewhere this line must be drawn. It would be fantastic if you can trainmedical professionals to be able to see when it is not so, but that would be a dangerous thingbecause misuse will happen. People will pull the plug on people who can't pay the bill or whomthey don't like, you know, things will happen. So, because of that, we're just allowing it to gowhichever way it goes, because if you touch it, all the consequences of it, you cannot control.
So, you support the life only with the hope that it will recover and once again, it will be backto life. There is nobody is supporting it with the intention that you just want to put it onthe machines and run it forever. The hope is because a few have come back after years of comatoseand the people who love them and the families, they are hoping against hope that this personwill come back and maybe a doctor is trying to assist that. Sometimes it goes to absurd levelsbecause nobody can take the call. Nobody is able to take the call because nobody is authorized totake the call as such. So, because of that, it goes to certain levels. But life support is onlywith the hope they will bounce back. Now, if you observe a person in comatose, there are two typesof people. With one type of people, the body is refusing to respond, but their mind and emotionis active. This is torture. Sir, this is not exactly true. Sometimes the family, the people,the doctors together, all of them somehow almost show and have seen such situationsthat the guy, the person is not going to come back. But there is a kind of human consciousness,a kind of guilt, a kind of responsibility, a kind of love, keeps the person in that state.
What I wanted you to throw light on is, what is the state of this life at that point? Becausethe life is not manifesting itself through this body. And neither it has taken, if youtalk about rebirth or reincarnation on another life, it has not done that. So, where, what is thestate of this life? Above all these things that you mentioned, there is a law. If you pull theplug, there is a law for that. And that's what I was coming to. There are two conditions in this.
In one condition, the body has become inert, that you are not able to get the body going.
But the one who is within the mind is active, emotion is active, all perceptions are there.
This is torture because the body is refusing to move. But there are other kinds of situations.
The body seems to be reasonably vibrant and active, digest food, everything is happening.
But inside, it's become blank. If inside has become blank,if you wait for five cycles of twenty-one days, then for sure life is gone. But body can be stillkept alive because of various medical processes, you're keeping it going. Body may not dwindlebecause body is still strong. Without a life, you're just keeping a body alive. This is like an emptyshell, but shell is kept alive. This is not a good thing to do. But if the person inside is alive,but the body is gone blank, now it's a very difficult decision for anybody to take.
And for all you know many times, all the things that you're talking, whether to pull the plug,not to pull the plug, all this the person understands. It's a very bad situation.
It shouldn't happen to anybody, but when it happens, how to deal with it, there's no particular way,because it's individual sensitivities. Just because the body cannot get up and the personunderstands everything, feels everything, you can't pat him up. Pulling the plug is as good ascutting up, you know. So this is a hard decision to take, there's no particular way to do it. Butyou only the body's vibrant, but inside has gone totally blank. Five cycles of 21 days, you can wait.
After that, very comfortably you can pull the plug for 100 percent, it's gone.
And Sadhguru, then what is your take on euthanasia or where do you, because here I'm also going tocome to the will. How much of will this life has and how much is it left to others?
Your, your point about euthanasia?
In my opinion, nobody has a right to hold an opinion on euthanasia, because it's your opinion,you're not making a judgment, it's not an informed judgment, it is an opinion. As I said,if life is gone but only body is there, you can pull the plug, but still, for the people around,including the doctor and the relatives and whoever, that person means something to them,they see the body's growth, the heart is beating all the parameters are good,why would they want to pull the plug? You cannot tell them to pull the plug because they think it's on.
So, I don't think... So, if he's left with an individual, then if he wants to willingly give up life.
But the problem is not in a state to say that, he might have said it before. Suppose he's in a stateto say that, so that brings to suicide. So, do you think he has the will and right to exercise that?
See, the simple thing that we did in this country is, if an individual decided,those who do not have the capability to smoothly exit this body without causing any damage to it,those who did not have this, they always walked away into the forest and just sat under a treeafter some time without eating, they would just go, this is a normal vana prastha.
You heard in Mahabharata all this kunti, all the dhrthras and even the dhrthrasan guy,
Sanjaya, all these people went into the forest to live on dry leaf and this and that for some timeand slowly dwindle the body and exit. The body begins to understand, all the creatures, most creatures do this.
You must see how a cobra dies. It's unfortunate that no documentation about these things have been done.
If a cobra realizes it's time to die, it will go up to someplace where it will not be eaten bypredators and things, usually it'll climb up a tree and sit on one branch and it just sits on the branchand that's it. In about twenty to twenty-five days, it will die because the cobra can easilyexist, its normal meal itself is spaced out somewhere between eleven to fifteen days. Because of that,beyond twenty, twenty-five days, thirty days, it will die, so it will simply sit without eatingand slowly dry up just like that. Even a creature, crawling creature like that has this much awareness,this would be the best way to do. But even if I talk about it today, the so-called modern societywhich eats fire meals a day, they will be terribly upset. So this has been the normal process.
If you are not a yogi, if you do not know how to exit, you come to a place, you'll sit quietlyby yourself. If your relatives are around, they won't let you do that, they will stuff food into you,you know, because our idea of love is to stuff the people as much as we can. So they won't letyou do those things, that's why people went to some place, sat in a place where the energies aregood because being in a positive, live energy space is important because to be without foodbecomes very effortless if the outside energy is conducive and supportive. If the outside energyis little depressing, you will say you will need lot more food and the compulsions of food are strongwithin you. So this is a way, but you can't suggest that to modern life, they will, you know.
