you
we'll start with the invocation.
please keep your right palm or your left palm, palm facing upwards, loosely placed on your lap.
Those of you wearing spectacles, please keep them aside.
We'll do the invocation together.
Welcome all of you
to guided Shakti-Chalna Kriya session.
So how many of you have done the Shunya program in past six months?
Is your Shakti-Chalna Kriya happening regularly?
How about others? Is your Kriya happening properly?
So before we start the session, we will like to remind you about few guidelines.
So this Shakti-Chalna Kriya is a rare opportunity for you to fine tune your practices and get your practice corrected.
So in order to make the best use of the session, we request if you can stay for the entire duration which is for three hours.
So the session will be guided. All you need to do is be alert and simply listen to the instructions with total involvement.
Every bit of attention that you have, you put it in.
When you do the practice, we want to review all the instructions for you.
So please ensure you go along with the instructions.
We again stress that it is very important that you stay alert throughout the session and be focused on the Kriya.
Only then you will be able to reap the maximum benefits.
So few things keep in mind.
Please ensure that you do not take the breaks in these three hours, either for the restroom or for the water.
Please do not use the mobile phone send between.
If you have any questions, we will look at it later. You can post it in the chat box after the session is finished.
But during the session, please do not post anything in the chat box.
We will be showing you the demos and videos of the Shakti-Chalna Kriya.
So you can be totally focused and get your practices corrected.
Hope all of you are on an empty stomach condition.
And if you need an extra cushion, you can take a minute and you can bring so.
We will review the Vajrasna posture as well.
Anybody needs an extra cushion or a bed sheet? You can take a minute and bring it so right now.
The audio is clear right now. Is it still low?
Can you, can some of you respond? Is it audio clear? Okay. Thank you.
So Sadhguru says Shakti-Chalna Kriya is a fabulous process.
But you need to be attentive.
Many people, it takes years of practice for you to focus on a breath, full set of cycles.
So many people can't focus their breath on one full inhalation, midway your thoughts,
wander off or you lose track or control.
So Shakti-Chalna Kriya is a rare opportunity.
This session is a very rare opportunity for you to find your practices.
So right now we will start by reviewing the mudras. We will start with chin mudra.
You can please observe. You can please sit in Adhir-Sidhassana and observe.
Now how you hold chin mudras is the tips of your thumb and pointing finger,
the finger are touching, forming a circle. The other three fingers are straight.
All four fingers are side-by-side touching.
There should be no gap here. The four fingers should be together.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs, palms facing down.
When you hold the mudra, only the mudra should be tight.
The rest of the arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed.
From the tip of the finger to the wrist, this mudra should be tight.
If you extend the tension into the arm, the mudra may turn negative.
So only the mudra should be tight. The rest of the arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed.
Elbows your rest, close to the body.
How you hold chin maya mudra? We will say the demonstration.
As for chin mudra, the tips of your thumb and pointing finger are touching, forming a circle.
But this time, the remaining three fingers are not straight.
Place the tips of the other three fingers at the base of the fingers
and then press them into the palm to form a fist.
Keep some pressure on the fingers. This is chin maya mudra.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs, palms facing down.
Only the mudra is tight. The arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed.
The elbows should rest, close to the body.
Now how you hold the third mudra is?
Place your thumb in the center of your palm.
Close the other four fingers over it, making a fist.
Keep some pressure on the fingers. This is the third mudra.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs, palms facing down.
Only the mudra is tight. The arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed.
The elbows should rest, close to the body.
Now we will review nadakriya.
So how you do nadakriya is holding chin mudra, the first mudra, utter the sound, a three times.
Switch to chin maya mudra, utter the sound, u three times.
Switch to aadimudra, utter the sound, ma with mouth closed, three times.
We will do the outy later after reviewing the instructions. Right now we will do nadakriya together.
You can place it in Vajurasana.
Do you remember the four points for Vajurasana?
Your big toes should be touching, not overlapping.
Chest erect, back straight.
Arms and shoulders loose and relaxed.
Four fingers face at the very tip of your knees.
If you are wearing spectacles, please keep them aside. Please close your eyes.
Hold chin mudra, the first mudra.
The tips of your thumb and pointing finger are touching, forming a circle.
The other three fingers are straight.
All four fingers are side by side touching.
When you hold the mudra, all the four fingers should be physically touching.
There should be no gap in between the fingers.
Make sure there is no clothing in between your fingers.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs, palms facing down.
Only the mudra is tight.
Arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed.
Elbows close to the body.
Open your mouth wide enough and utter the sound three times.
When you utter the sound, you notice where the maximum vibrations and contractions are happening in your body as you are.
We will do it together.
Eyes closed.
Eyes closed.
Eyes closed.
Switch to chin mudra.
The tips of your thumb and pointing finger remain as they are.
Place the tips of the other three fingers at the base of the fingers and press them into the palm to form a fist.
Keep some pressure on the fingers.
Now you utter the sound oo, by keeping your lips in an o-shape, exhaling fully into it.
We will utter these three times together.
Eyes closed.
Oooooooo...
Oooooooo...
Now hold.
Adi mudra.
The third mudra.
Place your thumb in the center of your palm.
Close the other four fingers over it, making a fist.
Keep some pressure on the fingers.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs, palms facing down.
Only the mudra is tight.
Arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed.
Elbows should rest, close to the body.
Now you utter the sound ma with your mouth closed.
Now how you do it is?
Let's say you utter the sound ma with your mouth open.
We'll do this together.
Just do it together along with me.
Maaaaaaa...
What does it become?
When you utter the sound ma along with with mouth open, what does it become?
It becomes ahh.
Now you utter the sound ma with your mouth closed.
How you utter is?
Mmmmmmmmmm...
Utter the sound three times, exhaling fully into it.
We'll do this together.
Hold Adi mudra.
Keep your eyes closed.
Notice where the maximum vibrations are happening in your body as you utter.
Mmmmmmmm...
Mmmmmmmm...
Slowly open your eyes.
Please come out of Ajarasana properly.
Slowly come up on your fists.
Stay in this position for 20 seconds.
Sit back down again in Vajrasana for 10 seconds.
Again come up for another 20 seconds.
Sit back down again for 10 seconds.
Now shift your body to whichever side is comfortable for you.
It remains sitting like this for a minute or two before unfolding the legs or getting up.
Now you can please sit comfortably.
Now
where did you notice the maximum vibrations were chin mudra?
Were you able to notice the vibrations for chin mudra, chin ma madra and Adi mudra?
For chin mudra it is in stomach region.
For chin ma madra it is in chest region.
For Adi mudra it is in throat region.
So when you utter the sound a holding chin mudra and when you utter the sound u holding chin ma madra
utter the sound ma with mouth closed holding Adi mudra.
You can notice the vibrations in the stomach region, chest region and in the throat region accordingly.
Now this is not about the knowledge.
It is not like yes yes I know if I say a I will notice the vibrations in the navel region.
It is not so.
It does not work like that.
So each and every time you utter the sound you completely be with the vibrations that are created by na dak rya.
Only if you internalize the kriya this way you will be able to reap the benefits beyond physical.
Next is dawti.
How to do dawti?
We will see the demonstration.
Please observe. You can sit in Adi Siddhasana and observe.
How to do dawti?
You hold chin mudra in your hands.
With the tip of your tongue you touch the hand and you are not able to do it.
You can see the hand and you are able to do it.
You can see the hand and you are able to do it.
How to do dawti? You hold chin mudra in your hands.
With the tip of your tongue you touch your lower teeth.
Make the sound shh.
Making the sound you expel the air forcefully.
Expelling the air bending forward.
You tuck your head in so that your eyebrows touch your knees and the top of the head touches the flow.
Stay there for 3-4 seconds in total emptiness.
Only for 3-4 seconds and as you inhale you come up.
We will do this together.
You can please sit in Adi Siddhasana.
Check the four points.
Big toes touching.
Not overlapping.
Chest erect.
Back straight.
Arms and shoulders.
Loose and relaxed.
Puffing a space at the tip of your knees.
Spectacles aside.
Eyes closed.
Hold chin mudra in your hands.
Make the sound shh and go down.
By the time you reach your knees you must be completely empty of the breath.
Tuck your head in.
Stay there for 3-4 seconds.
And as you inhale you come up.
Please rest.
You can come out of Adi Siddhasana properly on your own.
You can come out of Adi Siddhasana.
Please sit comfortably and open your eyes.
Please observe.
Now if your physical posture does not allow you to go that far,
you go as far as you can go but do not raise your body from Vatrassana posture.
Do not raise your hips from the heels.
Remaining in Vatrassana, you go as far as you can go.
So you do not raise your hips like this.
You go as far as you can go then tuck your head in.
Stay there for 3-4 seconds as you inhale, you come up.
Now we will look at a few common corrections for Dauti as well as mudras.
So when you hold, when you are doing Dauti, many of you have the tendency not to hold
chin mudra in the hands.
So make sure you hold chin mudra as you do Dauti.
For some of you, the sound is not coming properly.
It is shh, not shh.
Now we will look at a few common corrections along with the demonstration.
Let us take a look at the sound.
Some of you are first making the sound shh and then bending forward.
You make the sound as you bend forward.
Before coming down, some of you are taking your neck back and using it like a whip.
Shh, please do not do that.
Take the neck straight.
Do not place your forehead on the ground.
Mark your head in so that your eyebrows touch your knees and top of the head touches the
flow.
Stay here for 3-4 seconds and come up.
Some of you are staying down for longer than 3-4 seconds or not staying down at all.
Make sure you stay there for 3-4 seconds in total emptiness and as you inhale, you come
up.
As you mentioned earlier, if your physical stature does not allow you to go that far,
you go as far as you can go without coming out of a drasana.
Stay there for 3-4 seconds and as you inhale, you come up.
Now we will also look at a few common corrections for all the mudras.
Please observe.
In Chin Mudra, for some people, the tips of the thumb and pointing finger are touching
like this or like this or like this.
Make sure it's a very tips of your fingers that are touching.
Do not keep the fingers apart.
Do not press down on the mudra.
The thumb and the pointing finger should be touching forming a circle.
While holding Chin Maya Mudra, some of you are folding the fingers without tucking them
in.
Place the tips of the 3 fingers at the base of the fingers and then press them into the
palm to form a fist.
In Adi Mudra, ensure the knuckles are not sticking out.
Place your thumb in the center of your palm.
For Merudanda Mudra, some of you are folding the fingers, folding the 4 fingers without
tucking them in.
Place the tips of the 4 fingers at the base of the fingers and then press them into the
palm to form a fist.
Ensure the thumbs are not drooping like this.
Keep your thumbs pointing straight up perpendicular to the ground.
So there is a tendency to tilt your hands.
Again the thumb points straight up perpendicular to the ground.
For all the mudras, ensure you do not place your hands to the front, back, outside, inside,
twisted or unaligned.
Place the hands on the middle of the thighs so that the elbows are naturally close to
the body.
Do not keep the elbows away from the body.
Your elbows should be close to the body.
Do not keep the palms raised.
Your palms should be on your thighs.
So the next time when you do the kriya, you can incorporate all these corrections in mudra
kriya.
Sorry, in Nada kriya.
Now the next mudra we are going to do is called mudra kriya.
In this kriya, you will breathe remembering 4 points to breathing.
Do you remember the 4 points to breathing?
The 4 points to breathing are, breathe fully, fully in, fully out, breathe slowly, slowly
in, slowly out.
There should be no jerks.
Jerks means you do not do it like this.
It should be one smooth inhalation and exhalation.
Now 4 to 5 to ratio, you can estimate it like this.
When you exhale, there should be a sound from the pit of the throat.
So what are the 4 points?
Breathe fully, fully in, fully out, breathe slowly, slowly in, slowly out.
There should be no jerks.
It should be one smooth inhalation and exhalation.
And when you exhale, there should be a sound from the pit of the throat.
These are the 4 points to breathing and 4 to 5 to ratio, you can estimate it like this.
You inhale fully and slowly.
It is different for different people.
Let's say you take this much time for the inhalation.
Whatever the time you took for inhalation, that is 4.
When you hold the fullness, you hold it for approximately half the time you took for inhalation,
which is 2.
When you exhale, you ensure your exhalation is slightly longer than the inhalation, which
is 5.
When you hold the emptiness, once again you hold it as long as you held the fullness, which
is 2.
So 4, 2, 5, 2.
This 4, 2, 5, 2 is not in terms of numbers, counts, calculation or seconds.
This is a certain approximation.
Now what is the first point to breathing when you do mudra kriya?
The first point to breathing is to inhale fully.
When can you inhale fully if you are empty inside?
So always ensure you start mudra kriya with an exhalation.
So we will be doing mudra kriya, holding 4 mudra, 4 mudras, that is Chin mudra, Chin
mya mudra, Adi mudra, Merudanda mudra.
So here we will be keeping the time for each of the mudras.
Do it till I ask you to switch.
So you inhale fully, slowly.
Hold your breath for approximately half the time you took for inhalation.
Exhale fully, slowly, slightly longer than the inhalation, making the sound from the pit
of the throat.
Hold the emptiness as long as you held the fullness.
This is one cycle.
When I ask you to switch, you complete the cycle and then switch to the next mudra.
If you breathe once, remembering 4 points to breathing and 4 to 5 to ratio, that is
one cycle.
Now we will start with Chin mudra.
First mudra.
Sit in Madrasana, check the 4 points.
Big toe touching, not overlapping, chest erect, back straight, arms and shoulders, loose and
relaxed.
Open a space at the tip of your knees, keep your eyes closed.
Chin mudra.
Be totally focused upon the breath.
Breathe fully, slowly.
Remember the ratio, 4, 2, 5, 2.
It is where the maximum expansions and contractions are in the body as you breathe.
We are back in the back.
No problem.
I hate you next time.
you
you
you
switch to chin my mudra
only the mudra is tight
the arms, shoulders and neck are loose and relaxed
focus on the breath
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
feel
the
piece can help it out like this
health
ready to work
Just by breathing, the Kriya will not happen. You need to understand. This is not a breathing
exercise. This is not a breathing technique. Shakti-Chalna Kriya is about the inner energies.
It is not about the breath. We are only using the breath as a means. So only if you are
totally focused upon the breath, the Kriya will happen. Now you hold Adi Mudra and do
the same breathing. Remembering 4 points to breathing, 4 to 5 to ratio. Focus on the breath
and notice where the maximum expansions and contractions are happening in the body. Do
you tell I ask you to switch to the next Mudra? Please sit in Madrasana. Check the 4 points.
Ice closed. Adi Mudra. Place your thumb in the centre of your palm. Close the other 4
fingers over it, making a fist. Keep some pressure on the fingers. Be totally focused upon the
breath. Breathe fully, slowly.
Switch to Meeru Dandamudra. Place the tips of the 4 fingers at the base of the fingers.
Place them into the palm to form a fist. The thumb points straight up perpendicular to the ground.
Complete the cycle and stop. Hold chin Mudra. Do one doubt the and rest.
away.
you
please sit comfortably and open your eyes.
You will notice the maximum vibrations and contractions where the expansions and contractions
were in Adi Mudra and Merudanda Mudra.
For Adi Mudra where was it?
Sensations will be all over the face but you can notice the maximum expansions and contractions
in the throat region that is the upper lobe of the lungs are activated.
For Merudanda Mudra you can notice the maximum expansions and contractions in all the three
loops but only in the back portion.
First the lower back expands, then the middle back, then the back of the ribs expand and
then the upper back.
This Mudra variation is very beneficial for the back problems.
Anyone suffering from back problems can do.
Mudra Kriya holding Merudanda Mudra more than the others.
Now the next Kriya we are going to do is called Sukakriya.
When you do Sukakriya there is no ratio, no sound, no kumbaka, no shunya ka.
You simply breathe slowly and gently.
You should not make any sound when you exhale or inhale.
The breath should be as slow and gentle as it is possible for you.
Just relax and let the breath settle down by itself.
Now before we start Sukakriya we will look at a few common corrections.
You can please sit in Ardesidasana and Absalb.
Ensure that you do not keep your head down, your head should be straight.
Do not keep your head tilted to one side or the other.
Your head should be straight.
Do not keep your fingers apart.
Do not keep your fingers apart.
Your four fingers should be together pointing straight up.
There is a tendency to rest your fingers on the forehead.
Keep your fingers away from the forehead.
Do not keep your shoulder raised or tensed.
Keep your shoulder relaxed.
Do not keep your elbow away from the body.
Your elbow should be close to the body.
Now we will do Sukakriya together.
Anyone with the block nostrils, just check if there is anybody with the block nostrils.
If you have the block nostrils, please come out of Ardesidasana properly.
Stand up, jog on the spot briskly for a minute or two.
If there are people who cannot jog, you can make two fists in your hands.
Raise your hands above and swing them down vigorously with the sound from the pit of
the throat.
You can do this for 25 to 30 times.
You can please do the jogging or the variation.
Those of you who are not doing the jogging or variation will start with
Sukakriya.
Those of you who read the jogging, just wait for a minute.
Allow your breath to settle down before starting Sukakriya.
Receive your breath and lay through this.
you
you
you
you
you
those of you who did the jogging continue
and
check if the breath is balanced, if it is not balanced continue for two more minutes
if it is balanced please come out of Ajarasana properly
you
you
those are still doing so kakariha please come to the cycle and stop
please sit comfortably and open your eyes
the next
we are going to do is called Mahat Pranakriya
we will be doing Mahat Pranakriya in a certain mood called Purnamudra
how to hold Purnamudra he will demonstrate please up so
how to hold Purnamudra is make two fists with thumbs inside make them touch at the point where your rings would be on your ring fingers if you are wearing them
this contact should be maintained throughout the kriya
maintaining this contact with the palms facing up place the fists on the thighs
so that it is in contact with the lower abdomen press down on the wrists raise the shoulders
pull the chest in and straighten the arms as much as you can
the result is arms are completely straight elbows are locked and there is no gap between the arms and the body
only the mudra is tight the rest of the body should be loose and relaxed
this is Purnamudra
please observe
make sure you do not keep your thumbs outside make two fists with thumbs inside
do not keep the fists like this with only the upper part of the finger touching
or only the knuckle touching
make them touch at the point where your rings would be on your ring fingers if you are wearing them
this contact should be maintained throughout the kriya
do not keep your fists facing downwards or towards the stomach
with the palms facing up place the fists on your thighs so that it is in contact with your lower abdomen
do not keep the mudra loose or push the chest out
press down on the hands raise your shoulders pull the chest in straighten the arms as much as you can
do not lean into the mudra there is a tendency to move forward
keep the arms straight stretch the spine as much as you can
to straighten the hands to straighten the arms do not bring the hands to the front like this
the abdomen contact has to be maintained
so maintaining that contact to whatever extent it is possible for you to tighten the hands you do that much
in order to get further into the mudra do not allow the knees to come apart
there should be a four finger space at the tips of your knees throughout the kriya
now shekthi chalna kriya is a very powerful kriya there are certain people who should not attempt this
so we will go over the conditions like that conditions like this the people who should not attempt
if you have any conditions like that you please do not attempt mudra pranakriya there is an alternative we will let you know
so there are people who have hernia in the abdomen region people who have any kind of heart ailment or cardia condition
people who have gone through a major surgery in the last six months
or those of you who are planning to undergo one in the next three months
anyone with any kind of a hemorrhage of the brain or been operated upon the brain
ladies during any stage of pregnancy or periods
right now if you are having periods you can do it for the case of learning but as a practice do not do it when you have periods
so these such people should not attempt mudra pranakriya others can do it
so now he will demonstrate one full cycle of mudra pranakriya
you can please sit in Ardesi Dhasana and observe
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
Please open your eyes.
You can please rest.
You can sit comfortably and open your eyes.
So the purpose of this was to teach you to blow all the air out using your diaphragm-like
a pump.
So, everything you have should go out in a one single blow.
In one single blow using your diaphragm-like a pump, everything that you have should go
out.
Now, the next step you are going to do the same thing, blowing all the air out using your
diaphragm-like a pump.
Except this time keep your mouth open a little more and you make the sound by constricting
the pit of the throat like this.
I want you to do like this once when I say one.
When I say one all of you keep your mouth a little open and make the sound when you blow
out by constricting the throat.
Keep your ponomodra fully tight.
Ready?
One, one, one, one, one, oneCentralrette jov31 Kenny.
So, still some of you may not be able to make the sound properly.
So, we will see the demonstration once again, just observe.
It is the same sound that you are making in the other careers.
The same one with a blow.
We will do this together once again.
Vajrassana, ice closed.
Keep your poor namadra fully tight.
Ready?
So, when I count one, you blow all the air out using a daffron like a pump.
Keep your mouth a little open and make the sound when you blow out the air by constructing
the throat.
Ready?
1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,
1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, please stop.
Please open your eyes.
Now, the next step, you are going to do the same thing.
Again, blowing out the air using your daffron like a pump.
Except this time, after blowing out three times, the fourth time, simply close your mouth
and continue doing it without losing the constriction.
That means, you will do the same way, only close your mouth.
So, when I count one, two, three, you do it with your mouth open.
When I count one, one, simply close your mouth and continue doing it.
So, do it only when I say one.
You do not do it fast, now you do it slow.
Do it only when I count one.
Eyes closed.
Vajurasana.
Put Namadra fully tight.
Ready?
1, 2, 3, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,
1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, please stop.
You can rest.
Please sit comfortably and open your eyes.
For the last thing, you just did was Kapalabati.
Now we will learn the next part of Madh Pranakarya, that is the Bandhas.
He will once again demonstrate one full cycle of Madh Pranakarya.
You can please observe.
Okay, can you just go to the...
You can just go to the...
The back is great.
you
So, what's been done is sitting in Vajrasana, holding Purna Mudra, you do 15 to 20,
Kapalabati. There must be a space of second and half gap between each Kapalabati. If you
do it very fast, you will not be able to continue because it takes second and half for the air
to get back into the lungs. Initially, if you are not able to make the sound, you first
open your mouth, make the sound, close your mouth and continue doing it. Now, if you empty
it, as I said, there should be a space of second and half between one Kapalabati and
the other. So, if you empty it, it will get back, but you should not notice an inhalation.
When you do Kapalabati, you should not do it like this, that is, this is not Kapalabati.
You do it in such a way as if there is no inhalation. There is an inhalation, you create a vacuum
and it just sucks back into you immediately, but you should not notice an inhalation. After
the last Kapalabati, do not allow the air to get back into you immediately. Hold shunaka
or emptiness for a couple of seconds. Make use of these two seconds to completely tighten
the arms. Then inhale fully, take your head back, take your chin in, bring it down. There
are three moments in this, but it should happen in one fluid motion. This is known as the jalandhara
bandha or the necklock. Once you engage the necklock, you will notice a little bit of
tautness in the muscles. Where the ribcage ends and the diaphragm begins, there is a
soft spot which will become taut. Once you notice it, it is a diaphragm lock, it is a
diaphragm lock or the udianabanda. Once you notice the diaphragm lock, you consciously
constrict and pull your enel muscles up and hold it. So once you engage the necklock, the
diaphragm lock and the enel lock, the diaphragm lock will happen by itself. Once you notice
the diaphragm lock, you consciously engage the enel lock. With these three locks, stay
here on fullness of the breath as long as it is comfortable for you. When you feel like
exhaling, bring your head up, exhale through the nozzles, making the sound from the pit
of the throat. After the exhalation is complete, you relax the purnamudra. After you relax
the purnamudra, you relax the enel lock. I will repeat once again, please stay alert.
So how you do this is sitting in Vajrahasana, holding purnamudra. You can do 15 to 20 kapalabati
per cycle. There must be a second and a half gap between each kapalabati. After the last
kapalabati, you do not allow the air to get back into you immediately. Hold shunya ka
or emptiness for a couple of seconds. Make use of these two seconds to completely tighten
the arms. Then inhale fully, take your head back, takkachinin, bring it down. Once you
engage the necklock properly, the diaphragm lock will happen by itself. Once you notice
the diaphragm lock, you consciously constrict and engage the enel lock. So with these three
locks, the necklock, diaphragm lock and the enel lock with these three locks, stay here
on fullness as long as it is comfortable for you. When you feel like exhaling, bring your
head up, exhale through the nostrils, making the sound from the pit of the throat. After
the exhalation is complete, you relax the purnamudra. Once you relax the purnamudra,
you relax the enel lock. Now we will do one cycle of Madhpranakarya together along with
the instructions. Those who should not attend Madhpranakarya, please wait. Those who can
do Madhpranakarya, you can please sit in Vajrasana. Check the four points. Big toe
touching, knot overlapping, chest erect, back straight, arms and shoulders, loose and relaxed.
Go finger space at the tip of your knees. Purnamudra, make two fists with thumbs inside. Make
them touch at the point where your rings would be on your ring fingers if you are wearing
them. This contact should be maintained throughout the kriya. Maintaining this contact with the
palms facing up, place a fist on the thighs so that it is in contact with the lower abdomen.
Press down on the wrists, raise the shoulders, pull the chest in. Straighten the arms as
much as you can. Please close your eyes. We will do this together. You can do 15-20 kapalabati.
It must be a second and a half gap between each kapalabati.
After the last kapalabati, remain in the emptiness for two seconds. Tighten the mudra.
Inhale fully. Take your head back, takachunin, bring it down. Once you notice the diaphragm
lock, engage the inner lock. Stay here on fullness as long as it is comfortable for you.
When you feel like exhaling, bring your head up, exhale through the nostrils, making the
sound. After the exhalation is complete, relax the portna mudra, then relax the inner lock.
If you are done, please come out of Azirasana properly.
You can place it comfortably and open your eyes.
Now we will look at a few common corrections for Madh Pranakriya. You can place it in Ardhasidasana
and Absal. While doing kapalabati, do not jerk the whole body. Just the diaphragm should
move. For some people, the gap between two kapalabati is less. It is less than a sakranahav.
They are doing it very fast. There must be a space of second and a half between one kapalabati
and the other. If you do it very fast, you will not be able to continue because it takes
second and a half for the air to get back into the lungs. So you do the kapalabati like
that. Some people are blowing from the chest or nose. You should blow all the air out using
your diaphragm like a pump. There is a tendency to strain the face while doing kapalabati.
The face should be relaxed throughout. For some people, the mudra is becoming loose
after some time. Keep the mudra straight. Keep the arms straight all the time. Some people
are engaging the necklock immediately after last kapalabati. After the last kapalabati,
wait about for two seconds and inhale fully. This while waiting the two seconds will help
you in a fuller inhalation.
When releasing the locks, do not relax everything at once. When you feel like exhaling, first
bring your head up. Exhale through the nostrils with the sound. After the exhalation is complete,
relax the pudna mudra. Then you relax the inner lock. It must happen in this order.
Now, in cooperating these corrections, you can do two more cycles of math pranakriya
on your own. One doubt the and rest. If there are people who should not attempt math pranakriya,
you hold pudna mudra. Breathe with 4 to 5 to ratio, remembering four points to breathing,
seven cycles, one doubt the and rest. You can do two cycles on your own. Keep your eyes closed.
You can complete the cycle.
Please sit comfortably and open your eyes.
Now we will look at a few more common corrections along with the demonstration. You can sit in
Arthasiddhasana and observe. While doing the necklock, some people are taking your head back and keeping it
there for the long time. The main aim of doing the necklock is to hold kumbaka. If you keep your
head back for a long time, the time for which you hold kumbaka will be reduced. So, you do the necklock like this.
For some of you, tucking in of the chin is not happening properly.
Take your head back. With the head still leaning back, pull your chin in tightly. Once your chin is fully in,
bring your head down and forward, resting on the pit of the throat. There is a tendency to relax the pudna mudra as you exhale.
Exhale fully first. Then relax the pudna mudra.
So, the next Kriyas we are going to learn is called Swana Kriya. How to do Swana Kriya? We will see the demonstration.
Please observe.
So, what is being done is, sitting in Vajrasana, you place your palms on your waist, loosely placed.
Inhale fully. Open your mouth wide enough and stretch your tongue out fully. If you stretch the tongue out fully, you will notice a tension in the uvula which is a tongue like
thing hanging from the top. You must stretch it to a point where you notice tension in the uvula. Once you notice a tension, you do the dog's breath.
If a dog comes running and stands here in front of you, how it would breathe? Just on the surface as rapidly as it is possible.
So, it is not like doing Kapalabhati. It should not come from the abdomen. It should be done as rapidly as it is possible only on the surface.
So, if you cannot do it that rapidly, you can start slowly and gradually increase the speed like this.
So, you do this 12 to 16 times. Close your mouth. Inhale fully. And engage the bandhas as you do in Shambhavi.
That is, take your head back, takkachinin, bring it down. Pull the daphram masas in. Pull the enal masas up.
Stay here on fullness as long as it is comfortable for you. When you feel like exhaling, bring your head up. Exhale through the nostrils, making the sound from the pit of the throat.
After the exhalation is complete, again take your head back, takkachinin, bring it down. Lock it up on the emptiness.
Stay here on emptiness as long as it is comfortable for you. When you feel like inhaling, bring your head up. Inhale through the nostrils.
After the inhalation is complete, you relax the daphram lock and then you relax the enal lock.
Now, before we do Swannakriya, we will look at a few common corrections along with the demonstration. Please observe.
Do not keep your hands on your hips.
Your hands should be on your waist, loosely placed.
Do not keep your shoulders forward or backward. Your elbows should be in line with your shoulders.
Some of you are stretching the tongue. Some of you are not stretching the tongue, tongue out or only partially stretching it out.
You must stretch the tongue out fully to a point where you notice tension in the uvila.
Some of you are doing it like kappalabati.
It is not like kappalabati. It should be done as rapid as it is possible only on the surface.
There is a tendency to strain the face while doing Swannakriya.
The face should be relaxed throughout the kraya.
Now we will do it together along with the instructions. You can place it in Vajrasana.
Spectacles aside, eyes closed. We'll do it together along with the instructions.
You place your palms on your waist, loosely placed. Inhale fully. Stretch your tongue out fully.
Now you do the dog's breath 12 to 16 times.
Close your mouth. Inhale fully. Engage the bandhas as you do in Shambhavi.
When you exhale, you make the sound from the pit of the throat.
When you're done, please come out of Vajrasana properly.
Please sit comfortably and open your eyes.
Next kraya we are going to do is called Kaka kraya. How to do Kaka kraya? We'll see the demonstration.
Please observe.
Kaka kraya.
So what's been done is Kaka kraya is exactly the same process as Swannakriya.
Instead of the dog's breath, you will be doing the bird's call.
So sitting in Vajrasana, you place your palms on your waist, loosely placed. Inhale fully.
Stretch your tongue out fully. Using your diaphragm like a pump, you pump the air out powerfully
and attach the sound. Kaka do it. The bird's call should not be uttered with the vocal chords.
Because the tongue is stretched out and you are breathing in a certain way, it will happen by itself.
Do it as forcefully as you can. Do it 12 to 16 times.
Then close your mouth. Inhale fully. Engage the bandhas as you do in Shambhavi.
When you exhale, you make the sound from the pit of the throat.
Now if there are people who are above 60 years of age and those who should not attempt kapalabhati,
you should do it gently without pumping. The sound is stretched, not forceful.
So the sound is like this.
Then close your mouth. Engage the bandhas as you do in Shambhavi.
Shall we do this together along with the instructions?
Now before we do it, we look at a common correction. You can trace observe.
Do not say kaka.
Kaka. Kaka. Kaka.
Or try to make any sound.
The bird call should not be uttered with the vocal chords. Because the tongue is stretched out, it will happen by itself.
We will do this together along with the instructions. Please sit in Vajrasana.
Your palms on your waist loosely placed. Inhale fully.
Stretch your tongue out fully.
Using your diaphragm like a pump, you pump the air out and attach the sound kah to it.
Do kaka karya 12 to 16 times.
Close your mouth. Inhale fully. Engage the bandhas as you do in Shambhavi.
When you exhale, make the sound from the pit of the throat.
When you are done, please rest.
Please sit comfortably and open your eyes.
The next kriya we are going to do is called Nagakriya. How to do Nagakriya? We will see the demonstration just himself.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So, what is being done is, you hold chin mudra in your hands. You inhale in installments.
Inhale a little bit. Hold count 1 to 9. You choose a certain piece of counting and you stick to that.
For example, you can count it like this. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Not too fast, not too slow. You choose a comfortable pace and you stick to that.
Inhale a little more. Count 1 to 9. Inhale a little more. Count 1 to 9. Like this, you inhale in 8 installments with a space of 9 counts between each installment.
At the end, for the last installment, inhale fully. Count 1 to 9. Then release chin mudra in both the hands. Close the right nostril with the right thumb. Exhale to the left nostril with the sound from the pit of the throat.
If you find 8 installments are a little difficult for you to start with. You start with 6 installments. If you find 6 is also difficult, you start with 4.
Before we do Nada Kriya, we will once again, we will see a demonstration along with the demonstration just observe.
So there is a tendency not to release chin mudra in the right hand.
At the end, after the full inhalation, hold count 1 to 9. Release chin mudra in both the hands. Then close the right nostril with the right thumb. And exhale to the left nostril with the sound from the pit of the throat.
I will repeat the instructions for Nada Kriya once again. So you hold chin mudra in both the hands. Inhale in installments. Inhale a bit. Hold count 1 to 9.
You count at a comfortable pace. You choose a certain pace and you stick to that. For example, you can count it like this. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. You choose a certain pace and you stick to that.
Inhale a little more. Count 1 to 9. Inhale a little more. Count 1 to 9. Like this you inhale in 8 installments with a space of 9 counts between each installment.
At the end, for the last installment, inhale fully. Count 1 to 9. Then release chin mudra in both the hands. Close the right nostril with the right thumb. And exhale through the left nostril with the sound from the pit of the throat.
If 8 installments are a little difficult for you to start with, you start with 6 installments. If 6 is also difficult, you start with 4.
Now as a correction, there is a tendency not to release chin mudra in the right hand. Ensure you release chin mudra in the right hand before you exhale from the left nostril.
Now incorporating this correction, you do naga kriya once on your own, one dao ti and rest. Sit in vajra sana. Eyes closed.
You
I am sorry after naga kriya, you hold chin mudra, do one dao ti, rest and then come out of vajra sana properly.
Thank you.
Please open your eyes.
Now the next kriya we are going to do is called pancha sahita kriya. So pancha sahita kriya means 5 organs, lungs, liver, stomach, kidneys,
and heart. So now we will start with the lungs. Lungs have 3 lobes, lower lobe, middle lobe and upper lobe.
We first want to activate the lower lobe of the lungs. So the count that we use is 4, 16, 8, 4. The mudra that we use is chin mudra.
So 4, 16, 8, 4, this is not a ratio, this is actual counting. You inhale for the count of 4, hold the air inside for the count of 16, exhale with the sound from the pit of the throat for the count of 8, then you hold out the breath for the count of 4.
We will do 3 cycles. I will keep the counting for you. I will guide the pancha sahita kriya. So you can do it along with the guiding.
You focus your mind on the lower lobe where the rib cage ends and the diaphragm begins. Holding chin mudra, focus your mind in the lower lobe and we will do 3 cycles.
Please sit in Vajrasana. Ice closed. Hold chin mudra. Focus your mind on the lower lobe where the rib cage ends and the diaphragm begins.
The count is 4, 16, 8, 4. I will keep the counting for you. Inhale 1, 2, 3, 4. Hold in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Exhale 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16.
Exhale 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Hold out 1, 2, 3, 4. Inhale 1, 2, 3, 4. Hold in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Exhale 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Hold out 1, 2, 3, 4. Inhale 1, 2, 3, 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. Next is the middle lobe. Hold chin myamudra, chin
myamudra. Focus your mind on the middle lobe in the chest region. It is the same count
4, 16, 8, 4. We will do 3 cycles. 4 is inhalation, 16 is holding the air in. 8 is exhalation with
the sound. 4 is holding out the breath. Eyes closed. Inhale 1, 2, 3, 4. Hold in 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Exhale 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Hold out
the breath. Inhale 1, 2, 3, 4. Inhale 1, 2, 3, 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. Inhale 1, 2, 3, 4. Inhale 1, 2, 3, 4. 1, 2, 3, 4,
14, 15, 16, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Next is upper lobe.
The mudra that you hold is Adi mudra.
The count that we use is the same count.
4, 16, 8, 4, 3 cycles, you focus your mind on the right shoulder region.
Hold Adi mudra, focus your mind on the right shoulder region, same count, 3 cycles.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Hold in, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Exhale, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Hold out, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
1, 2, 3, 4.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
1, 2, 3, 4.
Please open your eyes.
The next organ is liver.
Where is the liver?
It is on the right side just below the last ribs.
The mudra that we use is chin mudra.
Now what is the count for the lungs that you have just did?
The count for the lungs is 4, 16, 8, 4.
Now you bring the last suture to the front.
What will it be?
4, 4, 16, 8.
So the count for the liver is 4, 4, 16, 8.
4 is inhalation.
4 is holding the air inside.
16 is exhalation with the sound.
8 is holding out the breath.
We will do 3 cycles.
Ice closed.
Vajurasana.
Hold chin mudra.
Focus your mind on the liver on the right side just below the last rib.
The count is 4, 4, 16, 8.
We will do 3 cycles.
I will count it for you.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Hold in, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Exhale, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Hold out, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Please open your eyes.
Now the next organ is stomach.
Where is the stomach?
It is on the left side below the last rib.
Now what is the count that you used for liver?
The count that we used for liver is 4, 4, 16, 8.
Now you bring the last digit to the front.
What will it be?
8, 4, 4, 16.
So the count for the stomach is 8, 4, 4, 16.
8 is inhalation, 4 is holding the air in,
4 is exhalation with the sound, 16 is holding out the breath.
We will do three cycles.
Vajrasana, eyes closed.
Chin mudra, focus your mind on the left side,
just below the last rib for the stomach.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Hold in, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Exhale, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Hold out, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Please open your eyes.
The next organ is kidneys.
Where are the kidneys?
It is on either side of the spine,
in line with the navel at the back side.
The mudra that we use is chin mudra.
Now, what is a count for the stomach?
We just did.
The count for the stomach was 8, 4, 4, 16.
You bring the last organ to the front.
It will be 16, 8, 4, 4.
So the count for the kidneys is 16, 8, 4, 4.
16 is inhalation.
8 is holding the air in.
4 is exhalation at the sound.
4 is holding out the breath.
We will do three cycles.
Vajrasana, eyes closed.
Hold chin mudra in your hands.
Focus your mind on either side of the spine,
in line with the navel.
We will do three cycles.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Hold in, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Exhale, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Hold out, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4.
Inhale, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
1, 2, 3, 4
1, 2, 3, 4
Open your eyes.
The next organ is heart.
The mudra that we use is
chin maya mudra.
The mudra that we use is second mudra,
chin maya mudra.
The count that we use is
4, 16, 8.
4 is inhalation.
16 is holding the air in.
8 is exhalation with the sound.
There is no holding out the breath.
You focus your mind to the left of the chest bone
for the heart region.
We will do three cycles.
Please close your eyes.
Hold chin maya mudra.
Focus your mind to the left of the chest bone
for the heart region.
Eyes closed.
Inhale 1, 2, 3, 4.
Hold in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Exhale 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Inhale 1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Switch to chin mudra.
Doandhati and rest.
Inhale 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 15, 18.
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
please open your eyes
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
So hope
all of you have followed the instructions and then you are morning check the
we have trusted you in offering this online though
we don't have any control over you but still because many of
you were asking about
even in the Kriya support we are
we are seeing that many of you were waiting for the session online so we
are seeing that to have this session more recently from
now on so that you can fine-tune your practices from wherever you
are and
do the Shakti Chana Kriya properly
so right now we have some time
if you have any questions
we look at it right now
you can post your questions in the chat box
so
Namaskaram Ajay
please review the instruction other than Kriya for organs
or left side or right side of the body and how to direct prana in the
direction so
if you notice if you do
Shakti Chana Kriya properly
you are asking the question about the variations
if you do the Shakti Chana Kriya properly there is actually no need
you know you will notice where the prana is getting directed
if you do it properly but for your information we will repeat it
you can direct the prana to one side of the body
by holding the mudra on that side alone
let's say you want to direct the prana to the upper side of the body
so which mudra would you use if you want to direct the prana to the upper side
upper portion of the body
Adi Mudra
if you want to direct the prana to the right side
in the upper direction
you hold Adi Mudra on the right side
and you can do mudra Kriya
so that you will see that the prana is getting directed
as i said it is not like this is a knowledge
you have to do the Kriya and experiment with it and see
you have to experiment with it
Bhavana namaskaram
please explain Dauti again
so i will review the instructions for Dauti once again
how you do Dauti is
you hold chin mudra in your hands
with the tip of your tongue you touch your lower teeth
and make the sound
making the sound
you expel the air forcefully
bend forward
and reach your knees
by the time you reach your knees
you must be completely empty of your breath
tuck your head in
so that tuck your head in and stay there for
3 to 4 seconds in total emptiness
come up about one third of the way
then start the inhalation
and come up
Shrikanth
please go over Naga Kriya count once again
okay
so how you do Naga Kriya is
you hold chin mudra in your hands
you inhale in instalments
inhale a bit
hold count one to nine
inhale a bit more
count one to nine
inhale a bit more
count one to nine
like this you inhale in
8 instalments
with a space of
9 counts between each installment
at the end for the last installment
inhale fully
count one to nine
count one to nine
release chin mudra
in both the hands
close the right nostril
with the right thumb
exhale to the left nostril
with the sound from the pit of the throat
okay
namaskaram vasu
your question
for pancha sahita kriya, do we take a break in between organs
and do it as
especially transitioning from stamakukidney
inhaling for 16 is a bit tough
inhaling for 16 is a bit tough
so for pancha sahita kriya
initially if you have
if you have started
if you are doing the kriya regularly
by now if it is more than six months
by now it would have fallen in place
but still if you
find it difficult
to do pancha sahita kriya
in a flow it's okay to take a break
in between the organs
so when you're transitioning from one organ to another
you directly transition
there is no
extra breath inhalation or exhalation in between
it should be a flow
but if you are finding it difficult
if you are gasping for the breath
if you are not able to do it continuously
it's okay to get your breath into normal
before you transition into the next organ
so you just change the mudra
and you transition into the next organ
can you please explain
swanakriya once again
so how you do swanakriya is
sitting in vajrasana
you place your palms
on your waist
loosely placed
you inhale fully
stretch your tongue out
fully
once the tongue is stretched fully out
you do the dog's breath
so if a dog comes
comes running and stands here in front of you
how it would breathe
how it would breathe
just on the surface
as rapid as it is possible for you
so it should not come from the abdomen
it is not like doing kapalabhati
it should be done
as rapid as it is possible for you
only on the surface
you do this
12 to 16 times
then close your mouth
inhale fully
and you engage the bandhas
as you're doing shambhavi
when you exhale
you make the sound from the
pit of the throat
namaskaram kartik
how many cycles of math pranakriya
needs to be done
so today if you remember you have done
3 cycles of math pranakriya isn't it
so it is 3 cycles of
math pranakriya
7 in namaskaram
in swanakakriya
should the hands be taken off the waist
before releasing the inner lock
or should the lock be released
first followed by taking off the hands
so there is no such instruction
as such but you can first release the locks
and then relax your hands
namaskaram ritupan
sound in kapalabhati is not coming perfectly
what should I be doing wrong?
am I making the constriction
on the pit of the throat as well
so that's why we are conducting sessions like this
so that you can check your practice and correct your practice
so now that are the instructions clear to you
ritupan
if the instructions for math pranakriya
is clear to you
that you use your diaphragm like a pump
and you make the sound from the pit of the throat
so whatever the sound is possible for you
you make that sound
you don't try to imitate
somebody or
to get the sound
like how you have seen in the demo
it might take some time
you can slowly work towards it
but right now from the pit of the throat
if you don't still get the sound from the pit of the throat
you do it with your mouth open like this
so first start with your mouth open like this
if still many of you have the same question
you can please try it along with me
the same sound with a blow
same thing with the mouth closed
so whenever you see that the sound is coming
of the pit of the throat
sound is not coming from the pit of the throat
you open your mouth
make the sound close your mouth
and continue doing it
so while doing math pranakriya
the sound is not coming properly
open your mouth
make the sound close your mouth
and continue doing it
namaskaram hero
during menstruation if i get bleeding for 67 days
can i do math pranakriya after 4 days
or do i need to wait for bleeding to stop completely
so you have to wait till it stops completely
till your periods are over
only once your periods are over
kapalabati until then you do the variation
that is you hold purnamudra
and do seven cycles of 4 to 5 to ratio
remembering four points to breathing
richa Sharma namaskaram
please can you tell the variation for periods
and travelling please
so i just repeated for the periods
so you
instead of kapalabati
holding purnamudra
breathe with seven cycles 4 to 5 ratio
4 points to breathing 7 cycles
now by travelling
if you are able to sit in vadrasana
you can always do the full shakta chalakriya
as many of us
many of the volunteers
they keep travelling
but we still ensure that we do a kriya
on a daily basis
but on certain cases
like if you are travelling by bus or plane
for days together
where you can't sit in vadrasana at all
only in that case
you can sit on the chair
you remove your footwear socks
keep your big toe touching
keep your back rested
head straight
you cannot do full shakta chalakriya
you can only do nada kriya
no dao ti
mudra kriya
only deep breathing
no 4 to 5 to ratio
suka kriya
and panchasaita kriya
in other words
you are not doing any part of the kriya
which involves kumbaka shunya ka
but doing the kriya like this
70% of the benefit
may be lost
so as much as possible
just see if you are able to sit in vadrasana
and do full shakta chalakriya
namaskaram
nishant
what should we do instead of
math pranakriya if you are not doing
math pranakriya
so if you have any conditions
as I mentioned before
any physical conditions
you avoid kapalabati
instead of kapalabati
you hold purnamudra
and you do 7 cycles
of 4 to 5 to ratio
remembering 4 points to breathing
and 1 dao ti
namaskaram surish
I underwent surgery
for hernia 7 years back
can I do math pranakriya
please don't
so you do the variation that we just mentioned now
don't do kapalabati
namaskaram zalruk
should we do bandhas after every cycle of
math kapalabati
do you remember
did we do bandhas after every cycle of kapalabati today?
yes
so one cycle of math pranakriya
means kapalabati
and bandhas
you can do 15 to 20
so here as the time constraint
we will ask you to do only 15 to 20 kapalabati
but if you have
have been practicing it for long
so we suggest like
there should be a minimum of 50 kapalabati per second
cycle
minimum 50 kapalabati per cycle
and you can gradually increase the number of kapalabati as per your comfort
and number of kapalabati per each cycle
need not be equal you can do as many kapalabati as your comfortable with
per each cycle
so kapalabati
and bandhas means one cycle of math pranakriya
like this you will do three cycles of math pranakriya
how many kapalabati should we do in each cycle
it is just answered
so do we need to excel fully within the four counts
for kidney
because unable to excel fully within
four counts
what to do a ka?
namaskaram Sai Balaji
so in I hope this question is about
for pancha sahita kriya
yeah so the count for the pancha sahita kriya is
16, 8, 4, 4
so in pancha sahita kriya
it is never a full exhalation
or a full inhalation
you are breathing only as per the count
so you are not exhaling fully
you exhale for the count of four
and after that you stop it
and then you go with the second cycle
hope this answers your question
so in order to add this
some of you have mentioned
that you are not able to inhale or exhale
for the count of 16
that was only because
right now your lung capacity is still not
to that point where you are able to exhale
or inhale for the count of 16
so if you are practicing shakti chalakriya regularly
you will be able to see that your lung capacity increases
and you are able to inhale or exhale for the count of
16
but for now if you are not able to do it
as per the count
you still keep the count
you still keep the count and you will see that
you will be able to do it over a period of time
maskaram giga
in mudra kriya switching to
next mudra
is it continuous process going to the next mudra
yes
so in mudra kriya
it is a flow
it is a continuous process from one mudra to another
you just simply transition
mudra
can we restart shunya
as well along with shakti chalakriya
what are the four conditions for shunya
amaskaram amit
so in case if anybody else also have the same question
the four conditions for shunya
please focus
so the four conditions for shunya
the first two conditions are physical
the next two conditions are mental
so the first two physical conditions are
somewhat hungry
somewhat tired
no expectations
no reactions
to the external or internal situations
can you please review the kumbhaka and shunya
for the different kriyas
do we make the sound while inhaling
as well in mudra kriya
when are the daois
so hope this question should be
answered after doing this kriya today
but still
so when you are inhaling
you are not making the sound
okay so you are holding
only when you are exhaling
in shakti chalakriya
whenever you exhale
you make the sound from the pit of the throat
except sukkha kriya
when inhaling
you are not making the sound
so you are holding kumbhaka
so you are holding kumbhaka and shunya kha
only in mahath pranakriya
suana and kakakriya
in mahath pranakriya
you engage the bandhas
only on kumbhaka
in suana and kakakriya
you are engaging the bandhas
both in kumbhaka and shunya kha
and daois
you want me to review the sequence once again
so the whole shakti chalakriya
is like this
there are five sets
nada kriya daois
mudra kriya daois
sukkha kriya
mahath pranakriya
daois
suana kaka nada kriya
daois
panchasayita kriya
daois
how can we extend the practice time?
how long can we extend it
so
the duration of shakti chalakriya
can be increased
as you keep practicing it
over a period of time you will see that once you are practicing it regularly
your lung capacity increases
which results in your breath
being slow and full
and also if you are doing more kapalabati
this will result in extending the duration of shakti chalakriya
so your lung capacity
and number of kapalabati you are doing
the shakti chalakriya
might increase from
50 minutes, 1 hour or so
and even more to that
but if you are doing the kriya properly
it will take a minimum of 40 minutes
should we do bandhas after sukkha kriya
namaskaram kunal
did we do bandhas today after sukkha kriya
so no bandhas after sukkha kriya
so no bandhas after sukkha kriya
i remember learning math pranakriya with kumbhaka and shunya ka in 2006
and swan and ka kriya did not have kumbhaka that time
should i follow the new instruction or old steps
ok
so that's why the online session is for you
so whatever the instructions that has been told today
please follow that instructions
this is for nile
i'm sorry
namaskaram nile
during purna mudra
do we need to touch all fingers
at ringpoint
or just touching ring finger is fine
i'm not able to touch first finger at the ringpoint
so when you hold purna mudra
the priority is like your
ring fingers should touch each other
so when the ring fingers touch each other
the rest of the fingers should automatically fall in place
but at some instance there's a tendency for a pointing finger to come out
that's ok but
it should be the fists
the ring fingers should touch each other
and rest of the fingers you make an effort
so that they touch each other
kakha please explain pancha saitakriya for lungs
so lungs
had three loops
so we do pancha saitakriya for lungs
for three loops
three loops means lower lobe
middle lobe
and upper lobe
lower lobe of the lungs
you use chin mudra
count is
4, 16, 8, 4, 3 cycles
middle lobe, chin mai mudra
same count
three cycles
upper lobe, adi mudra
same count
three cycles
so for middle lobe you focus your breath
you focus your mind
the lip cage ends and the daphram begins
for the middle lobe you focus it in the chest region
for lower lobe it's in the
daphram, where the cage ends and the daphram begins
for the middle lobe, it's in the chest region
region, for the upper lobe you focus your mind on the right shoulder region.
Ms. Karam Tejil, pregnancy variations, yes we will go over the practice during pregnancy.
So during pregnancy you can do Shakta Chalakria with a little modifications, you can do nada
kria, do not attempt dauti at any point of time.
You can do mudra kria, you can hold kumba kanchunya ka, that is you can hold 4 to 5 to ratio.
Only in the beginning stages till you are comfortable with.
After some time if you are not comfortable holding kumba kanchunya ka, you do not hold
kumba kanchunya ka, you only do deep breathing, that is deep inhalations and deep exhalations.
Then sukakria you can do.
Math pranakrya, please do not do kappalabati, again hold poor namudra and do 7 cycles of
4 to 5 to ratio remembering 4 points to breathing.
Even here you hold 4 to 5 to ratio only until you are comfortable with holding 4 to 5 to
ratio.
After some time when if you are not comfortable holding kumba kanchunya ka, again just do deep
breathing, deep inhalations and deep exhalations.
Swana kaka naga kria, only until the beginning of 7th month.
Kaka kria must be done gently not forcefully, you can do panchasa hitakria.
Akka I will be doing this after 10 years, I was doing shambhavi but left shakta chalagria
can I continue after today.
Namaskara mahij, so if you have gone through the instructions, if the kria is clear to
you, you can continue to check the chalagria from now on.
Will shunya initiation get fade away if I haven't done it since 2 years?
Namaskara mvikrant.
Why you haven't done since 2 years?
Is the question that you have to ask for yourself.
So in case if you want to review, if you want to get clarified, just come for shunya volunteering
first then you can speak to the teacher but see that once you get initiated into shunya,
please see how to keep it on because this is a lifetime opportunity, once in a lifetime
opportunity so please don't miss it.
Namaskara mvikrant.
Can you please go through the seating position for shunya?
So when you sit for shunya, you can either sit in a cross-legged posture, comfortable
cross-legged posture or you can sit with your legs stretched and you can cross your
ankles right over the left.
Always the back should be rested, head straight.
Okay, I repeat.
So you can either sit in a comfortable cross-legged posture or you can sit in a sit with your
legs stretched, ankles crossed right over the left, back rested, head straight.
Your right palm should be placed over your left palm.
This is a seating posture for shunya.
Namaskara malaishwara sai.
Can people with epilepsy do SCK or that any modification?
You can do Shakti-Chalna-Kriya.
So as we mentioned, you can still do Shakti-Chalna-Kriya.
Namaskara maka, I want to know right order of Guru Pooja, Shambhavi, Shakti-Chalna-Kriya
and Suri-Kriya and Shunya.
Namaskara and Sandhya.
So you start with Guru Pooja, then Hatha Yoga practices that is Suri-Kriya or Suri Shakti,
then Shakti-Chalna-Kriya and Shambhavi.
Okay, I repeat, Guru Pooja, Suri-Kriya or Suri Shakti, Shakti-Chalna-Kriya and Shambhavi.
Namaskara malaishwara.
Namaskara malaishwara sai.
About the 4 to 5 to breath, should we commit to breath slowly and fully first or the ratio
first?
If I inhale as slowly as fully as I can, when exhale as 5 will be some difficult.
So in Mudra Kriya, it's always your full and slow breaths, but it is your natural breath.
Do not go beyond your capacity, do not go beyond what you can inhale or exhale for.
It should be full and slow, but it should still be your natural breaths.
So ideally if you see, your exhalations are anyway a little longer than your inhalations.
If you simply sit here and breathe with your eyes closed, you will see that your exhalations
are naturally longer than your inhalations.
So there is no such thing like it will be difficult.
You will see that you are not inhaling or exhaling beyond what you can do.
It should be a natural breath.
Namaskara maka, gap between 2 Shunya, can I do 3 Shunya aire?
Namaskara maskar.
So please stick to 2 Shunya sade and the gap between 2 Shunya s is 3 and half to 4 hours
and the conditions are important.
During the 4 hours gap, maintaining the conditions, do Shunya 2 times a day.
So once again we will review the sakta chalna kriya.
We will review the sequence once again.
So you start with nada kriya, nada kriya means chin mudra, sound a 3 times, chin maya mudra,
sound u 3 times, adi mudra, sound ma with mouth close 3 times, then chin mudra, dawti
once.
The next kriya you will be doing is mudra kriya.
In mudra kriya you will remember 4 points to breathing and 4 to 5 to ratio.
What are the 4 points to breathing?
Breathe fully, fully in fully out, breathe slowly, slowly in slowly out, no jugs, make
the sound during exhalation.
In each and every breath you remember 4 points to breathing and 4 to 5 to ratio.
So you will be doing mudra kriya using 4 mudras, chin mudra, chin maya mudra, adi mudra, mayrudandamudra.
You will be doing 7 cycles for each of the 4 mudras.
One cycle means you breathe once remembering 4 points to breathing 4 to 5 to ratio that
is one cycle.
So 7 cycles, 4 mudras.
Then hold chin mudra, dawti.
After that you do sukakriya.
How long you do sukakriya?
Sukakriya is for 3 to 4 minutes.
So if there are people who have the blog nostrils, you come out of Vajrasana properly, do the
jogging or the variation, then sit back in Vajrasana and do sukakriya for 3 to 4 minutes.
After 4 minutes, check if the breath is balanced, if it is not balanced, you continue sukakriya
for 2 more minutes.
The next kriya is Mahatpranakriya.
So we will do 3 cycles of Mahatpranakriya.
One cycle of Mahatpranakriya means holding poorna mudra, kappalabhati and engage the bandhas
on fullness.
This is one cycle of Mahatpranakriya.
You will be doing 3 cycles of Mahatpranakriya, chin mudra, dawti.
If there are people who should not attempt Mahatpranakriya, holding poorna mudra, you
do 7 cycles of 4 to 5 to ratio, remembering 4 points to breathing, one dawti.
The next set of kriya is Swana, kaka and naga kriya.
So Swana kriya, how you do Swana kriya, palms on your waist, loosely placed, inhale fully,
stretch the tongue out, do the dog's breath 12 to 16 times, close your mouth, inhale
fully, engage the bandhas, like in Shambhavi, engage the bandhas, both in kumbaka and shunaka
like in Shambhavi.
Next is kaka kriya, same as Swana kriya, palms on your waist, inhale fully, stretch the
tongue out, do kaka kriya 12 to 16 times, close your mouth, inhale fully, engage the
bandhas as in Shambhavi.
Next is naga kriya.
Naga kriya means you hold chin mudra in your hands, inhale in installments of 8, 6 or
4 with a space of 9 counts between each installment.
At the end for the last installment, inhale fully, count 1 to 9, release chin mudra in
both the hands, close the right nostril, exhale through the left nostril.
After naga kriya, dawti.
The last set of kriya we do is, pancha sahita kriya or you can remember it as 5 organs.
Here are the 5 organs, lungs, liver, stomach, kidneys, heart.
Lungs have 3 lobes, lower lobe, mudra is chin mudra, count is 4, 16, 8, 4, 3 cycles.
4 inhalation, 16 holding the air in, 8 exhalation with the sound, 4 holding out the breath.
For the middle lobe, chin my mudra, same count, 4, 16, 8, 4, 3 cycles.
Upper lobe, adi mudra, same count, 3 cycles.
The next organ is, liver on the right side.
Mudra that uses chin mudra, count is 4, 4, 16, 8, 3 cycles.
The next organ is, stomach on the left side.
The mudra that uses chin mudra, count is, 8, 4, 4, 16, 3 cycles.
The next organ is, kidneys.
The mudra that uses chin mudra.
It kidneys are on, the either side of the spine in line with the navel.
The count is, 16, 8, 4, 4, 3 cycles.
The next organ is, heart.
The mudra that uses chin my mudra.
The count is, 4, 16, 8, 3 cycles.
Then you end with, chin mudra, dawti.
Hope this session was useful to you.
Hope you made the best use of the program for these three hours.
So there are a few announcements.
The next Q&A session is on 14th April.
And may also we have a Q&A session which will be announced later.
But one announced is 14th April.
And the next review session where we will do the practice together is in June.
There will be a feedback form sent to your email.
Please fill the form.
And we'll see you back soon in the next session.
Right now we'll close with the invocation.
Please close your eyes.
Asa toma sait kamaya, tamasuma, jutir kamaya, riturma, amrutangamaya, amshanti, shanti,
shanti, shanti, shanti, shanti, shanti.
Oh
Oh
Oh
Oh
Oh
Oh
Oh
Oh
Oh
Oh
Oh
