Only when the feminine is on, that is a civilization.
Only in a culture, only in a place, only within a human being who sees life as inclusion.
In that person, feminine happens in full flow.
One who sees life as an achievement, one who sees life as a conquest, he or she will not know the feminine.
The nature of if we look at it as mind, if we look at it masculine and feminine has manifested itself on all levels, from the atomic to the cosmic, if we look at it with the perspective of ourselves and we particularly look at the mind part of it.
Masculine, the masculine part of the mind is intellect.
Intellect is like a skull power.
It's a knife with which you can cut everything and look by cutting you open, we can find your liver, kidney, heart, whatever.
But the most essential ingredient will be gone.
Life, isn't it?
So this is the nature of logic.
Logic is capable of grasping the mechanics of life, but never the life.
That is the curse of being masculine.
So what we are looking at as feminine is generally when it comes to the mind is referred as the intuitive.
Intusion is not a different dimension of perception.
Intusion is just a different level of function, that's all.
The feminine worship can be most ancient form of worship for the planets, just in India, the whole of Europe and the Arabian and large parts of Africa are always involved in feminine worship.
There were goddesses, before the inquisitions and the crusades which mainly talked about uprooting to pagan culture, what was considered pagan was just this.
People were involved in goddess worship.
And people who were involved in goddess worship were also to some extent had mastery over occult sciences, because they were involved in occult.
Naturally their ways were not understood by the common people.
So those cultures always understood, there is so much in the existence that you cannot understand and it's okay.
You can enjoy the benefit without even understanding it, which has always been the truth for everything.
I don't know how many of you have opened the bonnet of your car or your motorcycle engine and looked in as to how it works.
You don't know a damn thing about it, but you benefit from that, isn't it?
Just like that, the occult sciences had many things to offer to people, but logical minds could not understand and generally it was accepted in a society.
There are areas that you don't understand, but you can benefit from it.
You go to your doctor, you don't understand how this white little pill is going to make you healthy, but he says, pop it, it could be poison, but you pop it.
And it works sometimes.
Not all the time, it has not worked for everybody, it has worked for lots of people.
So that's why when he says, pop it, you pop it.
And when monotheistic religions started spreading, they started uprooting this organized way in Europe.
The whole crusade and inquisition process was all about this.
They just raised the ground, all the goddess temples and their whole mission must establish one God.
These many gods must be destroyed.
Systematically they burned every kind of literature except in India, everywhere else, wherever they went, the first thing that they did was they burnt all the books that existed, all the scriptures and they identified people who knew the practices and whatever else, they killed them or generally if they were women they were burnt.
Because the existence of feminine as a divine form would never allow an organization that they were planning to build.
You can never organize religion if women had a role to play.
Feminine an organization does not work.
You have to think masculine for organization.
Feminine is a certain spontaneity and exuberance.
It is not organized, organization.
I am not saying women, I am saying feminine, you must get that distinction.
I am not saying women.
A woman can be a man sometimes when she wishes to be.
A man can be very much a woman when he wishes to be.
Not in that context, I am not talking in terms of gender, I am talking in terms of the qualities.
So what is being referred to as pagan?
All of them were mother worshipers.
The goddess worshipers existed right across Europe, Arabia, Africa, South America, India of course.
Fortunately that is one place where it is still alive.
There is not a single village, not a single human habitation in South India, in the south of Deccan Plateau where they don't have their own goddess.
I want you to understand their own goddess.
In the north also this was true but though most of the Shakti stalls are in the north northern part of India, they got wiped out during the Islamic invasions.
That's what they went for.
Feminine being worshiped as God was the worst thing.
Idolatry is bad enough, the two worshipping a woman.
And Indian goddesses don't wear shirts.
So first thing they went and you know what they broke.
You know where their eyes are and what they break.
So they made them deformed and ugly.
So in the north, in the northern plains wherever Islamic empires spread, in those parts there are no feminine temples, they could have a few small ones here and there which survived.
All the major ones were raised to ground.
But in South it survived because they did not penetrate deep enough and those who came were fought back quite successfully.
So it did not happen on in South they built temples in such a monumental way.
It is all stone temples so they could not demolish.
They could not burn them down.
You can't burn them because they're all made of solid stone.
So it takes lot of labor to break us out Indian temple.
The same thing happened in Arabia after the advent of Islam, they were all wooden temples so they just burnt all the goddess temples, calling it as idolatry because of one word that was spoken somewhere.
You can see the history of this everywhere.
Whether you go to Egypt, you go to Syria, you go to Turkey, you go to… in Europe it's totally been wiped out.
Western Europe there's not a trace except maybe in a little bit in Greece.
Except in Greece everywhere else it's been very successfully wiped out.
Successful genocide of all the goddesses of happened in Western Europe.
In little Eastern Europe like Turkey and here and there they did not do it that efficiently.
They demolished it but they used the same stones as foundation stones for their churches and mosques.
So you will see faces of goddesses, body parts of goddesses in the foundation stones.
When I was in Turkey, this used to be a Finnish temple or a Greek temple probably.
Medusa is what Greek is it?
Medusa is Greek.
So then the early Christians came and broke the temple and when you go inside there is a very large water system.
This is a place where they collect rain water in huge quantities.
This used to quench the thirst of the whole city at one time.
Huge.
Under the building like basement kind of thing where it's spreading into something like maybe an acre or acre and a half of tank with column standing.
A fabulous piece of engineering, all very beautifully done arches, stone arches and this has standing water.
And as I went, you know, I went tourist, go to some extent and then come back because inside it's very dark and it's dank.
You know the water and that musty air, it's a little hard to breathe.
I was just looking at it because I saw some of the images in the columns and this, that which works very kind of disturbing.
And when I went inside this huge face, okay, this big face, you can imagine how big the statue would have been.
The face is like something like four by four block and the face is placed upside down as a foundation stone on top of it, as a column and it's in the tank.
This is the face of Medusa.
This was the main deity of the temple, head chopped and used as a foundation stone and
I am sure very intentionally kept upside down because if it's like this somebody may go and worship that also.
Kept upside down, just the mind which thinks like this.
It left me somehow.
My whole left side was kind of poisoned for a day, just looking at her face.
She was looking at me upside down in the water.
You know just the mentality of it, the plan behind it is so ugly and you can imagine we can't see all those women who got burnt, only the stone statue we can see.
But all those women, if you're willing you can hear their screams burning alive because these things don't go away.
So this is because whoever wanting to promote something, they clearly understood as long as that is goddess worship, they cannot organize one single religion behind which everybody will stand and it will become a superpower in the world.
That cannot be done.
Otherwise goddess worship or the feminine worship has always been the most fundamental form of worship everywhere in the world.
India is one culture which is still retained that segment.
So we talk much of human, every village always has a daily temple.
In Tamil Nadu you call it the Amman, but essentially it is a goddess temple.
And this is a culture where you will give another freedom to create your own goddess.
Some of you married them, some of you worshiped them.
So you could create your own goddess for your own needs according to the local needs.
Because the signs of the consecration were so prevalent, this kind of license was given that it was assumed they never will age at least every one person who will know how to do these things and that person will create the necessary energy for the space and people can experience it.
Because before the day I had a concentration with a small group of people I went on a tour of Devi temples.
Because I did not geographically not very conversant with the Amman, I chose to go in Karnataka because I knew where the temples are and these are not the famous temples.
These are little temples in small towns, villages, Sam.
And we were all on this, the past end.
So we went in search of these temples because we wanted to settle certain things.
The certain women were involved in the process and a part of them was refusing to budge into the Dealinga process.
So we wanted to work this out and we were looking for the right kind of space and energy where we can do it.
We could have created that right here but then it would mean building a shrine, maintaining the space continuously.
We are yet to concentrate one within one of going for another side temple where we could do these things and above all such a thing would invite again persecution of various kinds.
So we went in search of these temples and I was absolutely amazed in little towns in small sometimes even in villages.
The daily temples which have consecrated hundreds of years ago are still very alive, fully forcefully alive, years clearly.
And whoever did it, they did it very well.
The technology was very good and the technology was so widespread.
If it had to happen in so many places, obviously it was very widespread and known to people that they created these possibilities.
It was very humbling to see that in a tiny village somebody has consecrated something with great sophistication, very great amount of sophistication involved in such a process.
Nameless people, nameless yogis, nobody knows who those people are.
They didn't write their names on the temple and that's the beauty of it.
They didn't even think it is necessary for them to leave their name.
It is energy that their life is all, it's all it is.
So even today there are any number of goddess temples or daily temples around the country which are very, very powerful.
And most of these temples were created for a specific purpose, the requirement of the local area, accordingly they were created.
Today largely it might be lost as to how to create it but still people on people are going about creating it.
The yogis create their own deities.
They create a certain form and make it alive.
Rakhini, Dharkini, Chinnamasti, Kali.
They are all terrible images of feminine manifestation.
When people want to master a quote first thing is, you must come to terms with other kinds of beings who don't look like you.
The whole sadhana of Chinnamasti starts in the cremation grounds.