I said, I don't only enrollment time, we count. Once I sit here, I don't count. Four, four hundred, four thousand, four million, all same to me. I'm... When it comes to transmission, we are not in the number game. When it comes to administration, number game, what to do? Can't do any other way. But when it comes to transition, four or four thousand, I will do it the same way. So, three hours, thirteen days, four people. So when I was doing this program, even if this seventy to hundred people used to be there later on, if I just chant sixty percent, I've gone crazy, one twenty-five, thirty percent are scared, what's happening? I'm trying to calm them down, don't worry, they're just... They're just like that. They're just infected by me, so... Let's leave it for some time, they'll be okay. And everybody used to be amazed, this moment they'll be totally crazy, swabbing the floor, with their entire body, next moment. Still in, firm like that. So you... By the time initiation came on the day seven, this is over eighty-five percent are like this. It is from that, even today the culture among the volunteers, if there are two hundred participants, there must be minimum two hundred volunteers, because eighty to eighty-five percent had to be carried. They would be like that. So when I decided that this needs to reach a larger number of people and we need to train people to teach, we... I toned down everything. I toned myself down significantly, so that I look normal. I look civilized reasonably, act civilized, behave like that, be socially friendly, dress little more pleasantly, otherwise if I came and sat here, they looked at my eyes, they were boom, everything toned down. Then broke the program into many pieces in engineering, bhavaspindana, another one, another one, so that people go step by step slowly without going crazy. On the initiation day, we would have the full day, Sunday, initiations, we would have a huge problem, at least if there are two hundred, three hundred people, at least one twelve to fifteen people, it's a huge challenge to send them home. They don't want to go. If they happen to be women, serious problems, if they're men we can say, it's just crazy, if it's a woman, it'll add other dimensions to it. So we face all those things. So then I toned it down because I wanted to train teachers, others who can deliver this in different ways. So toned it down and broke it into many pieces, installments. Does it have to go in installments? So people's willingness comes in installments unless you break open their doors. You know if somebody comes and knocks on your door, you come and see through the people. This is how everybody used to see me, they're not. They can't hear you. Then somebody opens their little bit. This has been life. So as we broke the program into many pieces so that we can train people and deliver people so that the whole process moves step by step slowly, not one big boom. Come to a, you know, a certain stage of life now. We thought, you know, I've said this many, many times, all programs were created so that I can rub my experience off on people to some extent. So this is a little effort, this is just a one day program and it's not a new program, it is for the initiated people, already initiated people, not for fresh people. So these days I'm constantly in conferences, in public places always with people who don't know anything about it. So you're always giving what to say ABC. All the time talking a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, you if you say C, then what is that? If you say XYZ, then they're finishing. So if you say A, in that only social media will react. Whole lot of people abusing me, he's saying A, how can you say A? All kinds of idiots giving commentaries on the courts, on the videos, on everything who doesn't don't understand nothing, all right? So we're living in this world because the reach is big, so these problems are natural. So I thought I should spend time with the initiated a little bit. So this is just a, this is just an eight hour session one day where we thought we will handle it not as a logical process with a certain sense of abandon. But we don't have to be careful who is listening, who is recording and going to put one unconnected contextless sentence somewhere in the social media and create a controversy, not with those kind of concerns, just with people who want to be there, just spend a day with them. I don't know what I'll do. I only rub myself. So we have something else for you towards the end of the session. I think some of you would have seen that talk, we are so good with sharing about the very, very first programs he took in Hyderabad, the kind of commitment he had to take up just to go. He used to take four sessions in a day going from one place to another to another to another. But he was sharing that initially when he started taking classes, many of you may know
40 years ago, Sadhguru went through that powerful experience on Sharmonde Hills where, have you heard of it? All of you, you have gone through that video somewhere of one place or the other, where Sadhguru shares about how everything became one in his own experience. And it was very, very powerful. And since that day, his only dream has been, his only vision has been to make the entire world ecstatic. So initially when he used to take programs, there was just no structure. He was sharing in that video that if he used to talk of butterflies, he will talk only about butterflies. The next four or five days, he will only talk about butterflies. The programs, the structures that came much later on when things had to scale up. And it had to reach much, much larger groups. But perhaps those were the best moments for many people because there was no structure. And so Sadhguru could just do things on the fly, change, whatever he has to do very dynamically, depending on how the participants are, how they are receiving it. And but programs exist in our mind, the various programs and the names and so many things. It's not really about words that he speaks. It's about the transmission of his experience. For many, many of us, the most profound experiences we would have gone through is not necessarily due to a program. It's actually in those moments when we truly became open for a moment. Maybe we forgot ourselves. It could have happened in inter engineering program as well. It need not require another program or another program. It could have even happened in a satsang. It could have happened anywhere. Programs exist for logical minds. Over the years, I have been just amused because so many people have come across and everyone will share, oh, this is the program. Why? Because this program was for them. I have come across so many. They will say, no, no. In person is the program. Why? Because that is the program they attended. That is the program which worked for them. And then those who have attended online, they will vouch for online. There were people I came across who will even vouch for, oh, okay, okay, okay, okay. Is the program. I said, yes, I know. I have come across many sharing their own because we get stuck to the program and the format in the structure. But what Sadhguru is really looking for is to transmit his own experience. The one program and another program and another program, these are just opportunities for us to really become totally open or for him to be able to transmit whatever he has to share with the rest of us. So this is one another opportunity. And I'm really glad that this is the very first time because then there is no structure. Sadhguru can do freely, many, many things here. And it's really a privilege that it's an advanced step. It's an experiential program and all of us have the opportunity to be part of it either as a participant or even much better as a volunteer where he really can share be much more free, be much more dynamic and can share much more deeper experiences with all of us. So it's a huge opportunity. It's a great opportunity. I think I have been sharing this that the other advanced experiential program which is Haus Panna perhaps the closest to what is being offered right now. Sadhguru used to conduct it decades ago in India. In United Kingdom he did first and the only one in 20, 2007 in United States few years back he was conducting till few years back he was conducting. So it's been for a very long time that his, of course the programs are because of him but physically being there has not happened but at this time we have this opportunity that a very, very rare opportunity that Sadhguru himself is going to be there in person conducting an advanced experiential program and opportunities like this don't come easily. It comes perhaps once in many lifetimes that you know something like this we are able to witness where for the very first time he will be able to transmit something, take us through certain processes and mutations. I'm not sure what it will be as he says but we, I'm sure it will be very, very powerful and blasting for many people and it will be a huge opportunity. So are you all ready to be part of this? All right. So do you have any questions? I know we have not answered anything so far clearly but now we have far more clarity since the time we started talking about this program and now Sadhguru has also spoken. So if any of you have any questions you can send it in the chat right now. Is there anything we can do to heighten the receptivity for the program and how can we prepare to receive this? Can we be a volunteer remotely or we must be physically? Can we just volunteer for one day? Okay. I'll see how best how to participate as a volunteer. I'll see how best I can answer all the questions. I will also stay back after the session for those of you who have more questions but in the limited time we have will try and best try to cover as many as possible. So how to heighten your receptivity? I have to share my experience about how it has been for me over the years I started in
2006 and my first program was an eight days residential program with Sadhguru. It was the wholeness program. It was known as wholeness program. It happened in Ishaagas, India and I was in London, United Kingdom before that. So I traveled just to attend this program. Actually before I traveled I did not even know this is a yoga program. I just traveled to be with Sadhguru because I was so impressed by his talks. I had listened to him. I had gotten all his DVDs and I had just gone through everything. I just wanted to be with him. And after this program I remember somebody approaching me and asking Sadhguru is coming to London the next month for the very first time would you like to be part of it? And I being very apprehensive. I just said I will see first I will practice and I will see right now I am not sure. I had no intention to volunteer. And after I came back but I was approached to volunteer for the program because Sadhguru was coming and because Sadhguru was coming I decided to be a volunteer for wrong reasons but I decided. And the whole journey since that time for me even for that program being a volunteer was an eye-opening journey for me. I know many of you would have heard this many many times but this has been the experience for many hundreds and thousands of people as volunteers. And since that time I have had the fortune of continuing to volunteer and also step into Ishaanar trading and being a full-time volunteer which has now continued since then till now. And over the years volunteering for me has been an immense journey in the level of willingness, in the level of commitment, in the level of intensity. I really don't think so. What has happened to me over the years could have happened any faster if I was not a volunteer. What could happen in a small time would take otherwise years just to reach there because it has been such an eye-opening journey. It has been such a revelation in terms of where I am and what I need to work upon to really become more and more willing. I remember Sadhguru sharing once, do you know who is what is the ultimate willingness, what is the total willingness? And he is saying totally being willing means you have no will of your own, you are just choiceless, where you have no choices, you are just like simply totally willing. And there is nothing, you know, there is no other thought, there is no other need, just that is total willingness. And over the years I have realized every time when I have volunteered it has shown me many, many layers about me, every hesitation, every know that I said behind that there is some resistance, there is some limitation which I just need to look upon and break and move on. I remember initially when I went to Isha Yoga Centre, there used to be many times as part of Ishaṅga training we will be required to intensely volunteer. With the point we do not know when we are sleeping, we do not know when we are eating and sadhana it is up to us to continue and I know there is a need to continue. But there will be times when I will be just juggling and wondering how, I mean I have to first do my practices, I have to first do my practices, but at the same time there will be a need to do something, you know, some activity to make something happen. And at times I will wonder, you know, when I go back after the practices I will see those activity would have been taken care of by some other people who, you know, I do not know whether they did or not, they definitely also may have practiced their sadhana, but they took up that responsibility to make it happen. And it made me wonder, I am neither here when I am trying to practice, I am just thinking about, oh, you know, I am just not taking, standing there or sitting there with total responsibility of making something happen. Behind me not doing that there are some other people who are stepping up and taking it up and making it happen. So whenever I went and I really spent time with these people who were just yes and yes, it was immensely inspiring and it was a very, a total revelation about what I really need to do about myself. It's not that sadhana doesn't need to happen, it's just about becoming totally willing because I realize that the rigidity that I am carrying in my mind about practices, about sadhana, it's not just in my mind, it's also somewhere deeper within in my, you know, even in my energies, even in so many facets I could see. And then there was something that shifted within me because it was just so beautiful to see and be around people who were just so always yes and yes and yes. And I, if they can, why can't I, what is, if there's time there with that kind of responsibility, why can't I. And that is something that shifted many, many things within me. There'll be times when I'll be wondering, oh, I wish I could be in the hall, I wish, you know, I could be just near Sadhguru. And this also took some time and it shifted within me when I realized that it really doesn't matter where I am. What really matters is how I am and how I really, really get involved. I don't think it would have happened elsewhere. If I was just simply participating, it is just being a volunteer which showed me so many dimensions, so many things about myself that so many resistances, so many small, small limitations that I was just able to break and move on and move on. And over the years, it has come to a place where it just doesn't matter where I am, whether Sadhguru is physically there or not, whether I am in the hall or not, whether I do not know, whether I am part of the program, inside or not, it's just about just simply being there, totally involved, totally willing. And that is the most precious thing that I have learned that what I have to really work upon is myself and the willingness and the willingness and the willingness. And only because of volunteering, I have been able to really move in this direction. I know over the years I have also come across many simple volunteers. There will be times in Isha Yoga Center we used to come across, very, very simple volunteers who used to come from nearby villages and towns, not so much educated, not so much, you know, trained, not so many thinking minds, simple minded people. And we will sometimes conduct these volunteer meetings and we'll ask them, okay, how many of you are ready to do this activity, that activity, and these people, their hands will just simply spring up. And it always used to really, really amaze me how they can be there with so much willingness, such a beautiful spirit. And there will be people who will come from metro cities and towns, lot of educated minds, including one of them is me, who will think very, very, you know, think how to do anything efficiently, try to be smart, try to create various options. If it's a five minutes job, many times they will take 15 minutes to just think about what to do. And that could be the simple minded people will finish it in two minutes. So and then they will even hesitate to raise their hands. So every single hesitation, I realized that people have to work upon and especially me, I have to work upon instead of being smart, I have to really see how to really drop every barrier, every thinking, every resistance that I have. In fact, over the years, I have become sometimes when I'm organizing programs, I become envy of those who are volunteering. I wish somebody could just give me instructions and I could just melt myself, immerse myself into it. Instead of me thinking, okay, these 10 things, 100 things have to happen, have this happened, but I know that is another level of growth that I have to go through that in spite of being able to do next and next level of capability, next and next level of organizing, am I able to maintain that necessary balance and that necessary willingness and the joy of doing joy of activity, just doing joyfully within me. So volunteering has been a tremendous journey for me over the years. I would say, you know, whichever way, it's, is just creating an atmosphere where you learn to be a volunteer, ideally it's being a volunteer wherever you are, but in Nisha with Sadhguru's guidance, we create atmosphere where you know you will not be misused for anything that you do. It's a protected atmosphere where you can just drop all the barriers, all the walls and just become willing. So whichever way you be a volunteer and if you can volunteer for the program, we really have a need right now for enough number of volunteers to make the program happen. So those of you who can come forward, we are even happy if people are wanting to shift to volunteer, we are happy to support that. We do not have enough hands right now and without volunteers, we know the program cannot happen. The experience of participants cannot be the same. If you wish to participate, it's really up to you, you can volunteer for the remaining days and on the day of the program as well, we can see how to take your support. But even those who are not able to come before this as well, from now onwards, there are many opportunities where you can be a volunteer and this is not for us getting anything out of you. This is just to really, really work many, many things because volunteering can present that opportunity where the intensity of volunteering, you can just dissolve yourself. Sadhguru used to say, if given enough time, I can melt anyone, you know, you get me anyone, I can melt anyone and volunteering is that atmosphere, that melting pot where you can really melt dissolve and for a moment also that happens. Sadhguru can do his thing, he can transmit his experience and blow up. So I would say just see how you can be that way, if not each and anywhere, just bringing that willingness, that is what is going to create the maximum receptivity. Okay. Volunteers will be able to attend the program, somebody is asking with volunteers be able to attend the program. Actually all the volunteers wherever they volunteer in programs, the processes and meditators the key processes and meditations, they get to be a part of it. You know this for Inner Engineering programs, those of you who volunteer even for Bhavas Padana and even for this program and I'm very sure Sadhguru has never said no, he has always actually made sure with his compassion that volunteers also get the opportunity to go through it and be part of it and in together along with just making it happen for others. Can we understand more about the program content and the logistics part? I think even we do not know as Sadhguru is also saying he also doesn't know. Content wise I think it's best you be there with the total openness to go through it, the most important thing is how you are, how involved you are, how you can open yourself up to whatever Sadhguru has to take you through and it could be as I said the best moments for me, the most profound experiences for me has been in where Sadhguru has been able to be free in intimate settings where he doesn't have to think about, okay I cannot do this, I cannot say this because it really right now this program is for those who are initiated, so it's, he can take the next step. So really we do not know what is going to happen as such but it is definitely going to be a turning point, it can be a turning point for many of us if we have the necessary awareness and receptivity and if we can completely throw ourselves to whatever Sadhguru takes us through. And in terms of logistics I think all those details are available on the website as well whether you have to eat or not some of you are asking those questions, we will be anyway sending you all those details closer to the program about how you have to maintain empty system of conditions and all those details will be sent. Now this program as you all know is a very, very first time and we have the opportunity to touch almost 10,000 people in this program, so right now we are nowhere close to it but as you heard Sadhguru sometime back that when it comes to numbers, when it comes to administration and enrollment we are worried about the numbers, when it comes to transmission for all of us even including the Yishangas it has never mattered, even if it's 10 people go through the program in the similar way in the same structure even if it's 4,000 and
5,000 people will go through it in the same way but when it comes to administration and especially when it comes to Sadhguru's time, every moment of his we want to see how to really maximize the impact that he can create on the humanity around this. This is not necessarily going to happen ever, you know, again that Sadhguru will be coming down and we do not know, really it's a very rare possibility to make him come this time has taken quite a bit of effort, so it's just a fortunate, it's just a privilege that after 4 years he's coming and Sydney definitely for the very first time but we do not know in the limited time that we have with Sadhguru in his lifespan, whether we will have the opportunity for him to come to this side of the world, again it's not necessarily on the way for him to go to any other countries which he goes to frequently, so this is one such opportunity that we have in our hands that we can make 10,000 people sit with him in the hall and get impacted, I'm not talking about 10,000 as a number, I'm talking about
10,000 lives can get touched and this is really in all of our hands that how much we want this to happen. It's not just about 10,000, I think there are many, many more, we can make sure that they know about Sadhguru, who Sadhguru is what he has to offer, this kind of opportunity is not going to come again and I would even say this is not just about, we can be contented and think that okay I have registered as a participant, I have taken care of myself or I have registered as a volunteer, that's enough. But really I think this is not going to impact, this is this limited and narrow thinking is not really living in our engineering the way it is. Sadhguru is going all out to really, really touch every human being on this planet and the world that we live in, if we do not do enough about changing the world that we live in today or tomorrow or for the next generation it is going to come back and impact. I remember very well that many, many years back how it used to be in Australia, 2014 when we used to come, we used to conduct just one programmer year, you know and that too there was an effort to enroll people to make the program full just one programmer year and that too is Shingar Ran. Today we have come to this stage that we are able to touch this many people and it's very, very easy even if each person in this course, in this session right now goes all out. It's very, very easy to make sure that all is full of the people who can be with Sadhguru and get impacted in a certain way and recently I was just talking to somebody, one of the meditators and they were sharing that their daughter when she went, she goes to school, the school she goes to, the teacher said, you know, all of you are bound to get depression, you know, depression is very common and I was just shocked hearing this, that is this the kind of world that we want to leave with our next generation and is this the kind of, I mean if this is the thinking that those who are, you know, in the role of inspiring children, those who are in the role of teaching children, if this is how they are thinking, what is it that the next generation is going to take from us. So over the years we know many people have resorted, I mean if we look at the statistics, the drugs, the suicide rates, the depression, there is talk about mental pandemic and all this is, it's not we live in a cocoon of our own, this is the world that we live in and today or tomorrow it's going to impact each one of us. So if we are not going to do something today, it's going to definitely impact the next generation, our own children. So this is the opportunity to raise human consciousness, especially when Sadhguru is going to be in person, in our city, in our country, if we do not do enough, I think we will really, we will really regret it later. This is really the opportunity, we do not know in this limited lifespan that we have with him when again and how again and as I said, every moment of him, we really want to see how to create the maximum impact, maximum impact on the world because what he can do, none of us can. So we want each one of you to see how you can take this and share it with everyone else. I know many people who have been sharing that from the time they started posting on social media, for the first time, after many, many years they posted on social media, two of their friends signed up, two of their, you know, somebody looked at the WhatsApp status and inquired, what is it? So those of you who have been still hesitating to talk about it, we want all of you to go all out and speak about this. If there is a new movie and a very beautiful movie we want to talk about, if there is a very good restaurant we want to talk about, if there is something which can impact their life, transform their life forever and for something for which they will be grateful for you forever. I am sure many of you would have that experience where you introduce someone and they came back and they have been eternally grateful that you brought this in their life which was so much needed for them, whichever way they were going through because each one of us is always looking for inner well-being. So we want all of you to see how you can really go all out and share this. Please do not, this is not the time to hesitate. We have early but off for ending in just few days. This is really the time if each one of us can go all out and share this experience with us.
