time right now but if you can just stay on for another 5 to 10 minutes we'll go through this really quickly. It's very important that we all come together and support the various activities that we've put together for this program. So we'll just bring up a couple of slides right now. So the first thing is I think many of you have been going all out and supporting the various calling activities that we've had in the last three weeks. So right now on top of the calling activity we'd also like to really use this next one week. I think you might have already seen the communication that we sent that the early bird offer is valid and available till the 5th of December. So we only have one more week for us to really go all out and usually we find that during this early bird phase is when we see the maximum registrations. So how to reach out to your friends and family. This is one area that we have not really gone all out and focused on. So right now this next seven days this is this time to do it. The friends that you were speaking to, you have various groups of friends. I think all of us do. We have friends and families that we reach out to on a daily basis. We have friends and families that we see on the education's weddings with these anniversaries and then we have friends and family that we occasionally are in touch with and finally we also have friends that and family members that we are only in touch with on social media on Facebook or WhatsApp or Instagram. So we'll just go through this. The first thing we'd like all of you to do is to create a broadcast list and how you do this is. You can, it's very simple to do. What's a broadcast list? You can add all your contacts to a broadcast list and what you can do is you see you go to your open your WhatsApp app and you select each and every contact that you wish to add to a broadcast list. Once you do that you can long press and say create broadcast list and then you can give a name to this broadcast list. You can call it anything you wish to and after that send them a WhatsApp message about Sadhguru in Australia. You can send them a video. You can send them a message, an image. You can even send them your own sharing about what it has been to you to be in the physical presence of Sadhguru or what it means to use Sadhguru coming to Australia. So shall we take a couple of minutes and do that right now? So what you need to do is if you're using a WhatsApp, if you're using an iPhone, you can, if you open your app, you will see a broadcast list on the top left corner. You click on that and you can go to the bottom of the corner. You will see an option which says new list. Once you select the new list, you can select as many contacts as you wish. You can create one for your friends. You can create one for your family. Now what happens is once you create this list and you send the message, each one of the contacts that are on your broadcast list, they will receive the message as if you have send them an individual message, a personal message. It's not a group, it's a broadcast list. This just makes it easier and quicker for you to communicate to them on a one-on-one basis, but we would like to utilize the function of a broadcast list. If you have an Android phone, I will just go through the steps of an Android phone in just a minute. So if you have an Android phone, you just have to click on the three arrows at the top. And then you will see this option which says new broadcast. You select the new broadcast option and then you can go about choosing the contacts that you have. And you can name your broadcast list to what you wish to. And you can create different broadcasts lists for different groups of contacts that you have. And if you do not use WhatsApp, if you are thinking somebody is Timothy, you do not use WhatsApp. If you do not use WhatsApp and you're using Facebook or Instagram, what you can do is you can use the Facebook Messenger app. And in that app, you can create a group by adding multiple friends to one group. And this way, you can send one message to many simultaneously. So right now we have seven days. And I think many of you have, I'm sure many of you have more than 10 or 20 friends, or maybe even 100, 200 friends and family members put together. So instead of sending them individual messages, we'd like for all of you to send these messages on a one-on-one basis, but utilizing the function of a broadcast list. I'll go through the instructions once again very quickly. When you open your WhatsApp app on the top right, on the top left corner, you will see broadcast lists. And right at the bottom of your screen, you will see this option which says New List. Once you create, select the new list, you select the contacts that you wish to add to this list. Okay. So once you do that, you say create. After you create, you can give this a name, whatever name you wish to, and you can post a message on the broadcast list. When you post the message on the broadcast list, it would mean that all the participants on your broadcast list will receive the message as if you've sent it to them personally. Okay. So this is the first thing we'd like you to do. Now, once you finish this, please don't forget to fill out with a phone call or even further on a further message, because right now we want to make sure that everybody that you know also know that the group is coming to Australia and know the possibility of this program. Okay. Anka, I hope I've said your name correctly. No, this program is not only for the initiated, this program, sorry, I'll rephrase this program is only for the initiated, but right now, there is an option for them to register for a package registration where they can register for in engineering as well as the one day program. So they can do the registration at one go, and they go through in engineering, and after they complete in engineering, they can of course come and participate in the program. Okay. So registration is not limited to only those who are initiated. Registration is open to everybody. Is there a message format you, I think you're already part of maybe not one, but maybe at least a minimum of five groups with some group in Australia. You can pick any one message that you like there, and you can post it in this broadcast list. If you're not part of minimum five groups, that means you're not volunteering enough. Okay. Let us know and we'll add you to those groups. Okay. Now, the next thing we'd like all of you to do is as I was saying, once you send this broadcast list, I'm sorry, once you send them, once you create the broadcast list, and you send the messages to your friends and family, what we'll need you to do is call each and every one of them. Okay. So you can look at, you can see, you see, when you send a message or you update your WhatsApp status, you will immediately know who are the people who are watching the status, who are those who are responding to your messages. So you can start with them. Okay. You can start those who are much more open to listening to you about the program. Okay. So you contact them, and make sure that you reach out to each one of them personally through a call. It's a very simple call. It doesn't have to take much time, but you will see that this personal touch will go a long way in terms of giving them much more clarity about the program. And when they hear from you personally, one on one, and you speak about your experience, it will go a long way in them taking the step to register for the program. Okay. Okay. Now next after this. So we just consolidated it for you on this slide. So the call, call the friends that you are daily in touch with, you know, there'll be a lot of friends that you don't have to do the formal conversation. You can just ask, hey, you know what, it's a guru's coming, so make sure you call all of them. Friends that you're meeting occasionally or special events, make sure you message them, and then you call them. And those of you who are not on WhatsApp, and you're only on social media, or other means of social media, Facebook, Instagram, you can send them a message, a direct message on Facebook and Instagram, and you can also send group messages. Okay. You can add many people to one group, many of your contacts to a group, and then you can send them a message that way. Now all of you, I hope you're part of the SIA volunteers group. If you're not already part of the group, you will share the link to this group right now in the chat window. Please ensure that you join this WhatsApp group. And if you have any questions, we're going through a few steps fairly quickly right now, but if you have any questions you need any support, please feel free to ask in the SIA volunteers group, and we will be able to support you immediately. Okay. Okay. Now the next thing is, this is something interesting. We've not done this before. So for today, we want to do something a little bit new. So if you, we want all of you to go live, okay, just like how you'd see a, you would see news on TV, you would see somebody going live, a new cluster going live, you'd see different artists, spotsmen, popular people all going live on Instagram and Facebook, we'd want each and every one of you to do it right now. So we'll go through the steps. Are you all ready? We need your full attention. Okay. So what we want you to do is we'll go through the old school one first, Facebook, and then we'll go through the new generation Instagram next. Okay. So if you open your Facebook app, are you all ready? Are you all with me? Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Okay. Now we want you to open your Facebook app on your phone. If you click on the there's a plus button, you will see up the top. Okay. When you, when you select that plus button up the top right corner, you will see post story, real and live. You select the live option. Okay. When you select the live option, you will see your face right in the middle of the screen. You want to jazz it up. You can, you can add anything you'd like to on screen and you just go live. And once you go live, what we'd like you to do when you go live is three things. You say where you're where you're dialing in from, where you're going live from. Okay. And then you tell them that you're excited that's a group is coming or whatever you feel about the event, the program, you can share it openly. And then we want you to send that the early bird offer is finishing on the 5th of December. And we also want you to tell them the link on how they can register. Okay. So four things. You tell them where you're dialing in from. You tell them how excited you are or your experience with the program of being or how excited you are to be in sub-gris physical presence. And then once you do that, you tell them that the early bird offer is going to finish on the 5th of December. And finally, you share the link for them to register for the program. Similarly, for Instagram, if you open Instagram, you will see a plus button right in the center of your screen at the top in on your Instagram app. Life is the last option. You select live. Once you go live, once again, you share these four things that we asked you to do. Okay. Are we ready? Those are the guys via zoom on your phone. You can do it after the call ends. But those of you who have your phone handy or otherwise you can even log in on your laptop. So let's do it now. Okay. Once you're done, you can post links in the chat message. We'd love to go and go there and like, engage and do various things. Okay. Have all of you managed to do it? If you've not been able to do it, you can do it after the meeting is over and post your links in the in the WhatsApp group in the volunteers group. Okay. We just have one last thing that we'd like to show all of you before we close. So I, we will go through that right now. And a scardom, everyone. A few of you are still trying to go live and a few of you may have gone live already. But we definitely urge each one of you should make this effort. The small, small effort to reach people around us can make a huge difference. Even if each one of us can bring 10 people to the program, the hall is full. So that's the kind of impact that we are talking about. And that number is not part of it and definitely impacts the world around that we live in. In one of the dershans, sometimes back, Sadhguru spoke about raising human consciousness and how each and every person matters. We may think that, you know, it doesn't matter if we don't do it. Somebody else can do it. But Sadhguru has some other view about it. Each one of us, whatever little we can do to take it to the people matters. So we should, we'll share this with you. This is from one of the dershans in the year, sometime back. It's a very short video and we'll close afterwards. This was one of Mark Twain's favorite stories. Many of you, in the United States, you definitely did Mark Twain. At that time, in the 18th century, people believed that there are other people living on the moon. So the whole world decided all the human beings. Let us talk to them. No satellites. So they all decided, we will all stand on the rooftops of our homes at a particular time. At that particular moment, all of us with one voice will ask, who? Let's see what they say. And the whole world speaks, of course, they must hear. So in one voice, now I will say one, two, three. All of you must say, who? It should be heard in the moon. One, two, three. Now you have become like this. Stay again, a lot of work. So that moment started approaching. That day everybody gathered. They dressed in their best clothes, just in case. Just in case. You know, the woman and the moon are supposed to be very prevalent. Just in case, they come down. You want to be dressed for the occasion. So they were all dressed and ready. Now I'm not in something you know, but you know, moon is different. And that moment coming closer, everybody ready. This is a rare moment. The whole world, every human being uttering one word at a certain moment is a rare event. So I thought, such a rare event. What is the point meeting, who? Like a dog? Let me watch such a rare moment. Let me be a witness to this. Anyway, there's so many people. At a register, such a big voice. You heard so many already. Such big voices are there. What is mean? I'm such a small man. If I don't say, what does it matter? You know. So I want to witness this. And everybody is standing on the rooftop. That moment came. And it passed silently. Because everybody's thinking, everybody else will do it. Let's make sure that this moment doesn't pass silently. If each one of us can go all out, each one of us. And anyways, if we go all out, it makes a difference to the world around us. We live in. And what we do makes a difference to us, what somebody else does makes a difference to them. So shall we, shall we make it happen? Yes. Yes. Those are few on the lines. I'm joining here from the Sydney Centre, there's a group of people here. Rest of you. Can we make it happen? Please do a good thing. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. These do everything possible to make it happen. We have this time where it will make a significant difference. So for all of you can reach out to your friends, family, and this going live has a significant impact. Normally the maximum views are created when you go live. So please do everything possible. And we hope to see you in the program in some way. In the meantime, we're also getting together as many of you will know coming together in person or online. Every day, 6.15 to 8.30 and on the weekend, 10 o'clock to 7 PM. All the volunteers are coming together at various locations around Sydney, Melbourne, Perth, Brisbane, Canberra, Eddy,
8. Some location may exist very close to you wherever you are. But if you cannot, you can join online. We're coming together and working to make this program happen. So please be part of this. Even if you are participating, you can be part of making this program happen. It's a momentous journey. You usually need to make a program like this happen. It can do many, many things to you as a human being. So we wish and we hope that this program becomes a turning point for down under it. And Australia is never the same anymore. Yes? OK. Thank you very much for your closer than occasion. I have been palming with hunting. redundancy represent for all opportunities to in the school of crisis. Now the Whatever you called as joy, whatever you know is happiness. Did the joy rain upon you or did it blossom within and find an external expression? Which way was it? It always came from within, isn't it so? Have you noticed at a certain moment when you're very happy? Just walking is celebration. Do you see every step that you take, every breath that you take is celebration? The question is not about what you're drinking, what you're eating, what kind of atmosphere you're in, your joyful is the inner atmosphere which decides the celebration, not the external. If you're happy, life is celebration, isn't it? That's how it should be.
